{{Short description|Smallest unit of a chemical element}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Atom
| image = Helium atom QM.svg
| caption = A helium atom: two [[proton]]s and two [[neutron]]s in the nucleus, surrounded by a [[probability density]] cloud of two [[electron]]s.
| topics = [[Atomic physics]], [[Quantum mechanics]], [[Electric charge]], [[Atomic nucleus]]
| components = [[Electron]]s, [[Proton]]s, [[Neutron]]s
| size = ~10⁻¹⁰ m (1 Å)
}}

An '''atom''' is the smallest constituent unit of ordinary [[matter]] that constitutes a [[chemical element]]. Every [[solid]], [[liquid]], [[gas]], and [[plasma (physics)|plasma]] is composed of neutral or ionized atoms. Atoms are extremely small, typically around 100 [[picometre]]s across.

Atoms consist of a dense central [[atomic nucleus]], made of [[proton]]s and [[neutron]]s, surrounded by a cloud of [[electron]]s. The number of protons ([[atomic number]] <math>Z</math>) determines the [[chemical element]], while the number of neutrons determines the [[isotope]].

== History ==

=== Early atomic theory ===
The concept of atoms dates back to ancient Greek philosophers [[Democritus]] and [[Leucippus]] (~400 BCE), who proposed that matter is composed of indivisible particles called ''atomos'' (Greek: ἄτομος, "uncuttable").

=== Modern atomic theory ===
[[John Dalton]] proposed modern atomic theory in the early 19th century based on experimental evidence from chemical reactions. [[J. J. Thomson]] discovered the [[electron]] in 1897, showing atoms are divisible. [[Ernest Rutherford]] discovered the [[atomic nucleus]] in 1911 through his [[Rutherford scattering|gold foil experiment]].

== Structure ==

=== Nucleus ===
{{Main|Atomic nucleus}}
The nucleus contains >99.9% of the atom's mass but occupies only ~10⁻¹⁵ of its volume. Nuclear size: ~1–10 [[femtometre]]s (fm).

=== Electron cloud ===
{{Main|Atomic orbital}}
Electrons occupy [[atomic orbital]]s — regions of space defined by [[quantum number]]s where the probability of finding an electron is high. The [[Pauli exclusion principle]] limits each orbital to two electrons with opposite [[spin (physics)|spins]].

=== Bohr model ===
{{Main|Bohr model}}
In the [[Bohr model]] (1913), electrons orbit the nucleus in discrete energy levels:
:<math>E_n = -\frac{13.6\ \text{eV}}{n^2}</math>
where <math>n = 1, 2, 3, \ldots</math> is the [[principal quantum number]].

== Quantum description ==
{{Main|Quantum mechanics|Schrödinger equation}}
Modern [[quantum mechanics]] describes electrons as [[wave function]]s rather than particles with definite positions. The [[Schrödinger equation]] determines the allowed energy states:
:<math>\hat{H}\psi = E\psi</math>

== Chemical properties ==
The arrangement of electrons in [[electron shell]]s determines an atom's chemical properties. [[Valence electron]]s in the outermost shell participate in [[chemical bond]]s, giving rise to the periodic trends in the [[periodic table]].

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Atomic nucleus]]
* [[Atomic physics]]
* [[Bohr model]]
* [[Electron]]
* [[Isotope]]
* [[Quantum mechanics]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Atoms| ]]
[[Category:Atomic physics]]
[[Category:Chemistry]]
[[Category:Matter]]
