{{Short description|Core of an atom, composed of protons and neutrons}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Atomic nucleus
| image = Nucleus drawing.svg
| caption = A model of an [[atom]] showing the nucleus (red) surrounded by [[electron]] clouds.
| topics = [[Nuclear physics]], [[Proton]], [[Neutron]], [[Strong interaction]], [[Binding energy]]
| composition = [[Proton]]s and [[neutron]]s
| radius = ~1–10 fm (femtometres)
}}

The '''atomic nucleus''' is the small, dense region at the centre of an [[atom]], consisting of [[proton]]s and [[neutron]]s, collectively called [[nucleon]]s. It was discovered in 1911 by [[Ernest Rutherford]] based on the [[Geiger–Marsden experiment]], also known as the [[Rutherford scattering|gold foil experiment]].

The nucleus contains nearly all of the [[mass]] of an atom, despite occupying only a tiny fraction of its volume. Nuclear diameters are on the order of 1–10 [[femtometre]]s (1 fm = 10⁻¹⁵ m), whereas atomic diameters are on the order of 10⁻¹⁰ m.

== Composition ==
The number of protons in the nucleus, called the [[atomic number]] <math>Z</math>, determines the [[chemical element]]. The total number of nucleons, the [[mass number]] <math>A</math>, determines the [[isotope]]:
:<math>A = Z + N</math>
where <math>N</math> is the number of neutrons.

[[Isotope]]s of an element have the same <math>Z</math> but different <math>N</math>.

== Nuclear forces ==
{{Main|Nuclear force}}
The nucleus is held together by the [[strong interaction]], also called the [[nuclear force]], which binds nucleons together at distances of ~1 fm. This force overcomes the [[electric field|electrostatic repulsion]] between positively charged protons.

=== Binding energy ===
The [[binding energy]] of a nucleus is the energy required to separate it into its constituent protons and neutrons. According to [[mass–energy equivalence]]:
:<math>E_B = \left[Zm_p + Nm_n - m_{\text{nucleus}}\right]c^2</math>

The [[binding energy per nucleon]] peaks around [[iron-56]], making it the most stable nucleus.

== Nuclear models ==

=== Liquid drop model ===
The [[semi-empirical mass formula]] treats the nucleus as an incompressible liquid drop and accurately predicts binding energies.

=== Shell model ===
The [[nuclear shell model]] describes nucleons as occupying discrete energy levels, analogous to [[electron shell]]s in [[atomic physics]]. Nuclei with filled shells ("magic numbers": 2, 8, 20, 28, 50, 82, 126) are particularly stable.

== Nuclear reactions ==
* [[Nuclear fission]] — splitting of a heavy nucleus into lighter nuclei, releasing energy
* [[Nuclear fusion]] — combining light nuclei into heavier nuclei, releasing tremendous energy (powers [[star]]s)
* [[Radioactive decay]] — spontaneous emission of particles or radiation: [[alpha decay]], [[beta decay]], [[gamma decay]]

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Atom]]
* [[Binding energy]]
* [[Electron]]
* [[Neutron]]
* [[Nuclear fission]]
* [[Nuclear fusion]]
* [[Nuclear physics]]
* [[Proton]]
* [[Radioactive decay]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Atomic nucleus| ]]
[[Category:Nuclear physics]]
[[Category:Atomic physics]]
[[Category:Subatomic particles]]
