{{Short description="Energy required to disassemble a bound system into its constituent parts}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Binding energy
| image = Binding energy curve.svg
| caption = Binding energy per nucleon vs. mass number. [[Iron-56]] has the highest binding energy per nucleon.
| topics = [[Nuclear physics]], [[Atomic nucleus]], [[Mass–energy equivalence]], [[Strong interaction]]
| SI_unit = [[Joule]] or [[electronvolt]]
}}

In [[physics]], '''binding energy''' is the minimum [[energy]] required to disassemble a system of particles into separate parts. A bound system typically has a lower [[potential energy]] than its constituent parts — this is what keeps the system together. The binding energy equals the [[mass defect]] via [[mass–energy equivalence]]:

:<math>E_B = \Delta m \cdot c^2</math>

where <math>\Delta m = \sum m_{\text{constituents}} - m_{\text{system}}</math> is the mass defect.

== Nuclear binding energy ==
{{Main|Nuclear binding energy}}
The energy that holds [[atomic nucleus|nuclei]] together. The [[semi-empirical mass formula]] ([[Bethe–Weizsäcker formula]]) approximates it:

:<math>E_B = a_V A - a_S A^{2/3} - a_C\frac{Z(Z-1)}{A^{1/3}} - a_A\frac{(A-2Z)^2}{A} + \delta(A,Z)</math>

The five terms represent volume, surface, Coulomb, asymmetry, and pairing contributions.

=== Binding energy per nucleon ===
Dividing by <math>A</math> gives the average binding energy per nucleon. This peaks at [[iron-56]] (~8.8 MeV/nucleon), making it the most stable nucleus.

== Implications ==

=== Nuclear fission ===
Heavy nuclei (beyond iron) release energy by splitting into lighter nuclei with higher binding energy per nucleon.

=== Nuclear fusion ===
Light nuclei (below iron) release energy by fusing into heavier nuclei with higher binding energy per nucleon.

== Atomic binding energy ==
=== Electron binding energy ===
The energy required to remove an [[electron]] from an [[atom]] ([[ionization energy]]). For [[hydrogen]] in the ground state:
:<math>E_1 = -13.6\ \text{eV}</math>

=== Gravitational binding energy ===
For a uniform sphere of mass <math>M</math> and radius <math>R</math>:
:<math>U = -\frac{3GM^2}{5R}</math>

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Atomic nucleus]]
* [[Mass–energy equivalence]]
* [[Nuclear fission]]
* [[Nuclear fusion]]
* [[Nuclear physics]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Nuclear physics]]
[[Category:Energy]]
[[Category:Binding energy| ]]
