{{Short description="Region of spacetime with gravity so strong that nothing can escape}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Black hole
| image = Black hole - Messier 87 crop max res.jpg
| caption = First image of a black hole ([[Messier 87|M87*]]) by the [[Event Horizon Telescope]] (2019).
| topics = [[General relativity]], [[Gravity]], [[Spacetime]], [[Event horizon]], [[Singularity (physics)|Singularity]]
}}

A '''black hole''' is a region of [[spacetime]] where [[gravity]] is so strong that nothing — no [[particle]]s or even [[electromagnetic radiation]] such as [[light]] — can escape from it. The boundary of no escape is called the [[event horizon]].

Black holes are predicted by [[Einstein]]'s theory of [[general relativity]]. The first direct image of a black hole was captured by the [[Event Horizon Telescope]] in 2019, showing the supermassive black hole in galaxy [[Messier 87|M87]].

== Properties ==
Black holes are characterised by only three parameters ([[no-hair theorem]]):
* [[Mass]] <math>M</math>
* [[Electric charge]] <math>Q</math>
* [[Angular momentum]] <math>J</math>

=== Event horizon ===
The event horizon is the surface of no return. For a non-rotating (Schwarzschild) black hole, its radius is:

:<math>R_S = \frac{2GM}{c^2}</math>

the [[Schwarzschild radius]]. For the Sun, <math>R_S \approx 3\ \text{km}</math>.

=== Singularity ===
At the centre lies a [[gravitational singularity]] where spacetime curvature becomes infinite and known laws of physics break down.

== Types ==

=== Stellar-mass black holes ===
Formed by the [[gravitational collapse]] of massive [[star]]s (>20 solar masses). Typical mass: 5–100 <math>M_\odot</math>. Detected via [[X-ray]] binary systems.

=== Supermassive black holes ===
Found at the centres of most [[galaxy|galaxies]], including [[Sagittarius A*]] in the [[Milky Way]]. Masses: millions to billions of <math>M_\odot</math>.

=== Intermediate-mass black holes ===
Hypothesised class: 100–100,000 <math>M_\odot</math>. Candidate objects observed via gravitational wave signals.

=== Primordial black holes ===
Hypothetical black holes formed in the early universe; could range from microscopic to stellar masses.

== Hawking radiation ==
{{Main|Hawking radiation}}
[[Stephen Hawking]] showed that black holes emit [[thermal radiation]] due to quantum effects near the event horizon:

:<math>T_H = \frac{\hbar c^3}{8\pi G M k_B}</math>

This causes black holes to slowly evaporate. For a solar-mass black hole, the temperature is ~10⁻⁸ K (negligible); microscopic black holes would evaporate rapidly.

== Observational evidence ==
* [[Gravitational wave]]s from black hole mergers ([[LIGO]]/Virgo, since 2015)
* Direct imaging by the [[Event Horizon Telescope]] (2019, 2022)
* Stellar orbits around [[Sagittarius A*]] ([[Reinhard Genzel]], [[Andrea Ghez]] — Nobel Prize 2020)
* [[X-ray binaries]] (e.g., [[Cygnus X-1]])

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Event horizon]]
* [[General relativity]]
* [[Gravitational wave]]
* [[Gravity]]
* [[Neutron star]]
* [[Spacetime]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Black holes| ]]
[[Category:General relativity]]
[[Category:Astrophysics]]
