{{Short description="Relativistic wave equation describing spin-1/2 particles}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Dirac equation
| image = 
| caption = 
| topics = [[Quantum mechanics]], [[Special relativity]], [[Spin (physics)]], [[Schrödinger equation]], [[Electron]]
| formula = <math>(i\gamma^\mu\partial_\mu - m)\psi = 0</math>
| proposed_by = [[Paul Dirac]], 1928
}}

The '''Dirac equation''' is a [[relativistic wave equation]] derived by [[Paul Dirac]] in 1928. It describes all [[spin (physics)|spin]]-½ massive particles, such as [[electron]]s, for which parity is a symmetry. It is consistent with both [[quantum mechanics]] and [[special relativity]], and was the first theory to account fully for [[special relativity]] in the context of quantum mechanics.

== Equation ==
In its modern form (using natural units <math>\hbar = c = 1</math>):
:<math>(i\gamma^\mu\partial_\mu - m)\psi = 0</math>

where:
* <math>\gamma^\mu</math> are 4×4 [[Dirac matrices]]
* <math>\psi</math> is a four-component [[spinor]] (also called Dirac spinor)
* <math>m</math> is the [[rest mass]]
* <math>\partial_\mu = \partial/\partial x^\mu</math>

In standard notation:
:<math>i\hbar\gamma^\mu\partial_\mu\psi - mc\psi = 0</math>

== Key predictions ==

=== Spin ===
The equation naturally predicts that the electron has spin 1/2 — a property that had to be introduced ''ad hoc'' in previous models.

=== Antimatter ===
Each solution to the Dirac equation has a corresponding solution with negative energy. Dirac interpreted these as [[antimatter|antiparticles]]: the [[positron]] (anti-electron), discovered by [[Carl Anderson]] in 1932. The Dirac equation thus predicted the existence of antimatter.

=== Magnetic moment ===
The Dirac equation predicts the electron [[magnetic moment]] with [[g-factor]] <math>g = 2</math>:
:<math>\boldsymbol{\mu} = -\frac{e}{m}\mathbf{S}</math>

=== Fine structure ===
The equation explains the [[fine structure]] of the [[hydrogen atom]] spectrum, including spin–orbit coupling.

== Dirac matrices ==
The [[gamma matrices]] satisfy the [[Clifford algebra]]:
:<math>\{\gamma^\mu, \gamma^\nu\} = \gamma^\mu\gamma^\nu + \gamma^\nu\gamma^\mu = 2\eta^{\mu\nu}I_4</math>

where <math>\eta^{\mu\nu}</math> is the [[Minkowski metric]].

== Limitations ==
* Single-particle interpretation fails for high energies (particle creation/annihilation)
* Superseded by [[quantum electrodynamics]] for full description of electromagnetic interactions
* Does not account for the [[anomalous magnetic moment]] of the electron (<math>g \approx 2.0023</math>)

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Antimatter]]
* [[Electron]]
* [[Klein–Gordon equation]]
* [[Positron]]
* [[Quantum electrodynamics]]
* [[Schrödinger equation]]
* [[Special relativity]]
* [[Spin (physics)]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Dirac equation| ]]
[[Category:Quantum mechanics]]
[[Category:Special relativity]]
[[Category:Paul Dirac]]
