{{Short description|Network of electrical components deployed to supply, transfer, and use electric power}}
{{Infobox physical quantity
|| name = Electric power system
|| image = 
|| caption = An electric power system encompasses generation, transmission, distribution, and consumption of electrical energy.
|| topics = [[Electric power]], [[Electrical grid]], [[Electric power transmission]], [[Electric power distribution]], [[Electrical substation]]
}}

An '''electric power system''' is a network of electrical components deployed to [[electricity generation|generate]], [[electric power transmission|transfer]], [[electric power distribution|distribute]], and ultimately consume [[electric power]]. Governed by the principles of [[electromagnetism]] and [[Ohm's law]], it is one of the most complex engineered systems in existence, encompassing everything from large [[power station]]s to the outlets in homes. The fundamental purpose of an electric power system is to deliver electrical energy from generators to loads reliably, economically, and with acceptable [[power quality]].

== Structure ==

An electric power system is typically divided into four functional subsystems:

# '''Generation''' — conversion of primary energy ([[fossil fuel]], [[nuclear power|nuclear]], [[hydroelectricity|hydro]], [[wind power|wind]], [[solar power|solar]]) into electrical energy at [[power station]]s.
# '''Transmission''' — bulk transfer of electrical energy at high voltages (110 kV and above in China; 69 kV–765 kV internationally) over long distances via [[transmission line]]s.
# '''Distribution''' — delivery of electrical energy at medium voltage (typically 10 kV, 20 kV, or 35 kV in China) and low voltage (220/380 V) to end users through [[electric power distribution|distribution networks]].
# '''Consumption''' — utilization by residential, commercial, and industrial loads.

Each stage is interconnected through [[electrical substation]]s, which transform voltage levels and provide [[switchgear|switching]] and [[protective relay|protection]].

== Generation ==
{{Main|Electricity generation}}
The total [[three-phase electric power|three-phase power]] generated by a [[synchronous generator]] is:

:<math>P = \sqrt{3} \, V_L I_L \cos\phi</math>

where <math>V_L</math> is the line voltage, <math>I_L</math> is the line [[electric current|current]], and <math>\cos\phi</math> is the [[power factor]].

Generation in China is dominated by coal-fired thermal plants, followed by hydroelectric, wind, nuclear, and solar photovoltaic. The total installed capacity exceeds 2,500 GW (2024). Generators must be synchronized to the [[electrical grid|grid]] frequency (50 Hz in China) and maintain voltage within prescribed limits.

== Transmission ==
{{Main|Electric power transmission}}
Transmission moves bulk power at high voltage to minimize <math>I^2R</math> losses ([[Joule heating]] per [[Ohm's law]]). The power transmitted over a line with [[surge impedance loading|surge impedance]] <math>Z_c</math> is:

:<math>P = \frac{V_S V_R}{Z_c} \sin\delta</math>

where <math>V_S</math> and <math>V_R</math> are sending- and receiving-end voltages and <math>\delta</math> is the [[power angle]]. China's backbone consists of 500 kV and 750 kV AC networks, with 1,000 kV UHV AC lines and [[HVDC|±800 kV / ±1,100 kV]] HVDC corridors linking western generation to eastern load centers.

== Distribution ==
{{Main|Electric power distribution}}
Distribution networks operate at lower voltages. Common Chinese medium-voltage levels are 10 kV, 20 kV, and 35 kV, stepped down to 380 V (three-phase) / 220 V (single-phase) for residential use. Network configurations include radial, ring-main, and mesh topologies, with [[distribution transformer]]s typically rated 50–1,600 kVA.

== System stability ==

Power system stability refers to the ability of the system to return to a steady-state operating condition after a disturbance. Three categories are recognized:

* '''Rotor angle stability''' — maintaining synchronism among generators. Governed by the [[swing equation]]:
:<math>\frac{2H}{\omega_s}\frac{d^2\delta}{dt^2} = P_m - P_e</math>
where <math>H</math> is the inertia constant, <math>\omega_s</math> is synchronous speed, <math>P_m</math> is mechanical power, and <math>P_e</math> is electrical power.

* '''Frequency stability''' — maintaining system frequency near nominal (50 Hz or 60 Hz) through balance of generation and load.

* '''Voltage stability''' — maintaining acceptable voltage levels throughout the network, closely related to [[reactive power]] balance.

== Power flow analysis ==

Steady-state analysis of a power system is performed via [[power flow study|power flow (load flow) analysis]]. The complex power injected at bus <math>i</math> is:

:<math>S_i = P_i + jQ_i = V_i \sum_{k=1}^{n} Y_{ik}^* V_k^*</math>

where <math>Y_{ik}</math> are elements of the [[bus admittance matrix]]. This system of nonlinear equations is solved iteratively using the [[Newton–Raphson method]] or fast-decoupled methods.

== Protection and control ==
{{Main|Protective relay|SCADA}}
Power systems require extensive protection schemes using [[circuit breaker]]s, [[protective relay]]s, and [[switchgear]] to isolate faults from [[electric current|short-circuit currents]]. Modern systems employ [[SCADA]] (Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition) and [[energy management system]]s (EMS) for real-time monitoring and control, along with [[phasor measurement unit]]s (PMUs) for wide-area situational awareness.

== Power quality ==
{{Main|Power quality}}
Key power quality metrics include:
* Voltage magnitude deviation from nominal
* [[Harmonics (electrical power)|Harmonic distortion]] (Total Harmonic Distortion, THD)
* Voltage sags, swells, and transients
* Frequency deviations
* [[Power factor]] (<math>\cos\phi</math>)

== See also ==
{{Portal|Energy}}
* [[Electrical grid]]
* [[Electric power transmission]]
* [[Electric power distribution]]
* [[Electrical substation]]
* [[Three-phase electric power]]
* [[Electric power]]
* [[HVDC]]
* [[SCADA]]
* [[Ohm's law]]
* [[Electromagnetism]]
* [[Electric current]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Electric power systems| ]]
[[Category:Electrical engineering]]
[[Category:Energy infrastructure]]
