{{Short description|Part of an electrical generation, transmission, and distribution system that transforms voltage}}
{{Infobox physical quantity
|| name = Electrical substation
|| image = 
|| caption = An electrical substation transforms voltage levels and provides switching, protection, and control functions.
|| topics = [[Electric power system]], [[Electric power transmission]], [[Electric power distribution]], [[Electrical grid]], [[Power transformer]]
}}

An '''electrical substation''' is a part of an [[electric power system|electrical generation, transmission, and distribution system]] where [[voltage]] is transformed from high to low or low to high using [[power transformer]]s, which operate on the principle of [[electromagnetic induction]]. Beyond voltage transformation, substations provide [[switchgear|switching]], [[protective relay|protection]], [[SCADA|monitoring and control]], and [[power factor correction|reactive power compensation]].

== Types of substations ==

=== Step-up substation ===
Located at [[power station]]s, step-up substations transform generator voltage (typically 10–25 kV) to transmission voltage (110 kV–1,000 kV). The generator step-up (GSU) [[power transformer|transformer]] rating matches the generator's MVA:

:<math>S_{\text{GSU}} = \frac{P_{\text{gen}}}{\cos\phi}</math>

where <math>P_{\text{gen}}</math> is the generator's active power output and <math>\cos\phi</math> is its [[power factor]].

=== Step-down substation ===
Transmission-to-subtransmission or subtransmission-to-distribution voltage reduction. Typically 220/110 kV, 500/220 kV, or 110/10 kV in Chinese systems.

=== Distribution substation ===
The final transformation stage, reducing medium voltage (10 kV, 20 kV, 35 kV) to low voltage (380/220 V). May be outdoor (pole-mounted or pad-mounted) or indoor (in building basements for urban areas).

=== Switching substation ===
Performs switching and protection functions without voltage transformation. Used to sectionalize transmission lines and improve reliability.

=== Converter substation ===
Houses [[HVDC]] converter valves (thyristor-based [[line-commutated converter|LCC]] or [[IGBT]]-based [[voltage-source converter|VSC]]) to convert between AC and DC.

=== Railway traction substation ===
Converts the utility three-phase supply to single-phase 25 kV AC (or 1.5/3 kV DC) for railway [[overhead line]] electrification in China.

== Key components ==

=== Power transformers ===
{{Main|Power transformer}}
The heart of any substation. Large power transformers are rated in MVA and insulated with [[transformer oil|mineral oil]] for cooling and insulation. The voltage ratio is determined by the [[turns ratio]]:

:<math>\frac{V_p}{V_s} = \frac{N_p}{N_s}</math>

On-load tap changers (OLTC) adjust the ratio under load, typically providing ±10% regulation in steps of 1.25%.

=== Busbars ===
[[Busbar]]s are the common electrical nodes that interconnect incoming and outgoing circuits. They are typically aluminum or copper conductors rated for the full substation current. The current-carrying capacity is limited by temperature rise:

:<math>I_{\text{rated}} = \sqrt{\frac{hA(T_{\text{max}} - T_{\text{amb}})}{R}}</math>

where <math>h</math> is the heat transfer coefficient, <math>A</math> is the surface area, and <math>R</math> is the resistance.

=== Switchgear ===
{{Main|Switchgear}}
[[Switchgear]] encompasses [[circuit breaker]]s, [[disconnector|disconnect switches]], [[instrument transformer]]s ([[current transformer|CT]]s and [[voltage transformer|VT]]s), and [[surge arrester]]s. Circuit breakers interrupt fault currents that can reach 40–63 kA. Common technologies:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Type !! Voltage range !! Interrupting medium
|-
| Air-insulated (AIS) || Up to 1,000 kV || Air at atmospheric pressure
|-
| Gas-insulated (GIS) || Up to 1,000 kV || [[SF6|SF<sub>6</sub>]] gas
|-
| Vacuum || Up to 40.5 kV || Vacuum interrupter
|}

=== Protection systems ===
{{Main|Protective relay}}
[[Protective relay]]s detect abnormal conditions — overcurrent, differential, distance (impedance), over/under voltage, over/under frequency — and command [[circuit breaker]] tripping. Modern numerical relays implement multiple protection functions and communicate via [[IEC 61850]] protocol.

=== Reactive power equipment ===
Substations often include [[shunt reactor]]s, [[shunt capacitor]] banks, [[static VAR compensator]]s (SVC), or [[STATCOM]]s to maintain voltage within limits. The reactive power delivered by a three-phase capacitor bank:

:<math>Q_c = \omega C V_{LL}^2</math>

where <math>C</math> is the per-phase capacitance and <math>V_{LL}</math> is the line-to-line voltage.

== Busbar configurations ==

The arrangement of busbars and switching devices determines substation reliability and flexibility.

=== Single busbar ===
All circuits connect to one bus. Simple and low cost, but a bus fault or maintenance takes out the entire substation. Used for small distribution substations.

=== Single busbar with sectionalizer ===
A [[circuit breaker]] divides the bus, allowing half the substation to remain in service during maintenance or faults on one section.

=== Double busbar ===
Two independent buses with each circuit switchable to either bus. High flexibility; common for 110 kV and above in Chinese substations.

=== Breaker-and-a-half scheme ===
Two buses with three breakers per two circuits. Any breaker can be taken out of service without interrupting any circuit. Standard for EHV/UHV substations:

:<math>\text{Total breakers} = \frac{3}{2}n_{\text{circuits}}</math>

=== Ring bus ===
All breakers form a closed ring. Economical for up to six circuits; a single fault is cleared without load interruption.

== Substation layouts ==

=== Air-insulated substation (AIS) ===
Equipment is insulated by air with sufficient clearance distances. Requires large land area but lower capital cost. Typical clearances:
* 110 kV: ~1.1 m phase-to-phase, ~1.0 m phase-to-ground
* 220 kV: ~2.1 m phase-to-phase, ~1.8 m phase-to-ground
* 500 kV: ~4.3 m phase-to-phase, ~3.6 m phase-to-ground

=== Gas-insulated substation (GIS) ===
All live parts are enclosed in grounded metal enclosures filled with [[SF6|SF<sub>6</sub>]] gas at ~4–6 bar. Requires only ~10–20% of the land area of an equivalent AIS. Dominant choice for urban and indoor substations. A 500 kV GIS bay fits in roughly 3 × 8 m floor space.

=== Hybrid (MTS) ===
Mixed-technology substations combine AIS busbars with GIS bays, balancing cost and space requirements.

== Earthing and safety ==
{{Main|Earthing system}}
The substation [[earthing system|grounding grid]] ensures touch and step voltages remain within safe limits during faults:

:<math>V_{\text{touch}} < \frac{0.116}{\sqrt{t_s}} \quad \text{(for 50 kg body weight, IEEE 80)}</math>

The grounding grid resistance should be less than 1 Ω for large substations and typically 0.5 Ω for EHV/UHV installations.

== See also ==
{{Portal|Energy}}
* [[Electric power system]]
* [[Electric power transmission]]
* [[Electric power distribution]]
* [[Electrical grid]]
* [[Power transformer]]
* [[Switchgear]]
* [[Circuit breaker]]
* [[Protective relay]]
* [[SCADA]]
* [[HVDC]]
* [[Electromagnetic induction]]
* [[Ohm's law]]
* [[Magnetic field]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Electrical substations| ]]
[[Category:Electrical engineering]]
[[Category:Electric power systems]]
[[Category:Power engineering]]
