{{Short description|Final stage in the delivery of electric power from transmission system to consumers}}
{{Infobox physical quantity
|| name = Electric power distribution
|| image = 
|| caption = Distribution lines carry electricity at medium and low voltages to residential, commercial, and industrial customers.
|| topics = [[Electric power system]], [[Electrical grid]], [[Electric power transmission]], [[Electrical substation]], [[Power transformer]]
}}

'''Electric power distribution''' is the final stage in the delivery of [[electric power|electricity]], carrying it from the [[electric power transmission|transmission system]] to individual consumers. The behavior of [[electric current]] in distribution feeders follows [[Ohm's law]] and [[Kirchhoff's circuit laws]]. [[Electrical substation|Distribution substations]] step down the transmission voltage to medium voltage (MV), and [[distribution transformer]]s further step it down to low voltage (LV) for utilization.

== Voltage levels ==

=== Chinese distribution voltages ===
{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Voltage class !! Nominal voltage !! Application
|-
| Medium voltage (MV) || 10 kV || Urban and rural distribution (most common)
|-
| Medium voltage (MV) || 20 kV || Newer urban distribution networks
|-
| Medium voltage (MV) || 35 kV || Rural and industrial distribution
|-
| Low voltage (LV) || 380/220 V || Three-phase four-wire system for end users
|}

In China, the standard low-voltage system is 380 V line-to-line (three-phase) / 220 V line-to-neutral (single-phase), operating at 50 Hz. Industrial motors commonly use 380 V or 6 kV / 10 kV direct.

=== International ===
European distribution commonly uses 10 kV or 20 kV MV and 400/230 V LV. North America uses voltages such as 4.16 kV, 12.47 kV, 13.8 kV, and 34.5 kV for primary distribution, and 120/240 V split-phase or 120/208 V three-phase for LV.

== Distribution network configurations ==

=== Radial system ===
The simplest configuration: a single feeder supplies power from the substation. Low cost but no redundancy — a fault anywhere on the feeder interrupts all downstream loads.

Voltage drop along a radial feeder of length <math>\ell</math> with uniformly distributed load:

:<math>\Delta V \approx \frac{I r \ell}{2}</math>

where <math>r</math> is the resistance per unit length and <math>I</math> is the total load current.

=== Ring main (loop) system ===
Feeders form a closed loop, with normally-open point(s). A fault can be isolated by opening the adjacent switches, and all loads can be served from the alternate direction. Common in urban Chinese distribution.

=== Mesh (network) system ===
Multiple feeders interconnect to provide the highest reliability. Used in dense urban centers. Secondary network protectors prevent reverse power flow into faults.

== Distribution transformers ==
{{Main|Power transformer}}
Distribution transformers step down medium voltage to low voltage for consumer use. Typical ratings for Chinese distribution:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Type !! Voltage ratio !! Typical rating (kVA)
|-
| Pole-mounted || 10/0.4 kV || 50, 100, 200, 315
|-
| Pad-mounted || 10/0.4 kV || 400, 500, 630, 800
|-
| Substation type || 35/10 kV or 10/0.4 kV || 1,000–1,600
|}

Efficiency is critical since distribution transformers are energized 24/7. Modern [[Amorphous metal transformer|amorphous core transformers]] achieve no-load losses as low as 30% of traditional silicon steel designs. The total [[copper loss|copper]] and [[magnetic core|iron]] loss is:

:<math>P_{\text{loss}} = P_{\text{iron}} + I^2 R_{\text{eq}}</math>

where <math>P_{\text{iron}}</math> (no-load loss) is constant and <math>I^2 R_{\text{eq}}</math> (load loss) varies with load current.

== Voltage regulation ==

The voltage at the consumer must be maintained within prescribed limits (typically ±5% of nominal in China). The voltage drop across a distribution line with load <math>P + jQ</math> is:

:<math>\Delta V \approx \frac{PR + QX}{|V|}</math>

Voltage regulation methods include:
* On-load tap changers (OLTC) at substation transformers
* [[Voltage regulator]]s on long feeders
* [[Shunt capacitor]] banks for power factor correction and voltage support
* [[Static VAR compensator|SVC]] and [[STATCOM]] for dynamic compensation

== Losses in distribution ==

Distribution losses constitute a significant portion of total system losses due to lower voltages and higher currents. Total losses are the sum of:

* '''Technical losses''' — <math>I^2R</math> losses in conductors and transformers, dielectric losses in cables
* '''Non-technical losses''' — metering inaccuracies, theft, billing errors

The loss ratio for a distribution feeder:

:<math>\%\text{Loss} = \frac{3 \int I^2(x) r \, dx}{P_{\text{delivered}}} \times 100\%</math>

China has invested heavily in reducing distribution losses, targeting average technical losses below 6%.

== Power quality in distribution ==
{{Main|Power quality|Power factor}}
Key concerns at the distribution level include:

* '''Voltage sags and swells''' — short-duration deviations caused by motor starting, faults, or load switching
* '''Harmonics''' — nonlinear loads ([[LED lighting]], [[variable-frequency drive]]s, electronics) inject harmonic currents
* '''Three-phase imbalance''' — single-phase loads cause voltage unbalance:

:<math>\% \text{Unbalance} = \frac{V_{\text{max deviation}}}{V_{\text{average}}} \times 100\%</math>

* '''Power factor''' — industrial loads with induction motors may have low [[power factor]], corrected with capacitor banks to avoid penalties:

:<math>\cos\phi = \frac{P}{\sqrt{P^2 + Q^2}}</math>

== Distributed generation integration ==

Modern distribution systems increasingly accommodate [[distributed generation]] (DG) — [[photovoltaic system|rooftop solar]], small wind turbines, [[combined heat and power]] (CHP). DG introduces challenges:
* Bidirectional power flow
* Voltage rise at injection points
* Protection coordination complexity
* [[Islanding]] detection requirements

== See also ==
{{Portal|Energy}}
* [[Electric power system]]
* [[Electrical grid]]
* [[Electric power transmission]]
* [[Electrical substation]]
* [[Power transformer]]
* [[Power factor]]
* [[Power quality]]
* [[Three-phase electric power]]
* [[Circuit breaker]]
* [[Switchgear]]
* [[Ohm's law]]
* [[Electric current]]
* [[Electromagnetism]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Electric power distribution| ]]
[[Category:Electrical engineering]]
[[Category:Electric power systems]]
