{{Short description|Study of forces and their effects on motion}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Force
| image = Force examples.svg
| caption = Forces can be described as pushes or pulls, which can cause an object with mass to change its velocity.
| topics = [[Newton's laws of motion]], [[Vector (physics)|Vector]], [[Resultant force]], [[Free body diagram]]
| SI_unit = [[newton (unit)|newton]] (N = kg·m/s²)
}}

In [[physics]], a '''force''' is any interaction that, when unopposed, will change the [[motion]] of an object. A force can cause an object with [[mass]] to change its [[velocity]] (which includes to begin moving from a state of rest), i.e., to [[accelerate]]. Force can also be described intuitively as a push or a pull. A force has both [[Magnitude (mathematics)|magnitude]] and [[direction (geometry)|direction]], making it a [[vector (physics)|vector]] quantity.

The [[SI derived unit|SI unit]] of force is the [[newton (unit)|newton]] (N), defined as the force required to accelerate a one-[[kilogram]] mass at one [[metre per second squared|meter per second squared]]: 1 N = 1 kg·m/s².

== Newton's second law ==
{{Main|Newton's laws of motion}}
According to [[Newton's laws of motion|Newton's second law]], the [[net force]] on an object equals the rate of change of its [[momentum]]:
:<math>\mathbf{F} = \frac{d\mathbf{p}}{dt}</math>

For constant mass, this simplifies to:
:<math>\mathbf{F} = m\mathbf{a}</math>
where <math>m</math> is the mass and <math>\mathbf{a}</math> is the [[acceleration]].

== Types of forces ==

=== Fundamental forces ===
{{Main|Fundamental interaction}}
All forces in nature can be traced to four [[fundamental interaction]]s:
# '''[[Gravity|Gravitational force]]''' — attraction between masses; the weakest but infinite-range
# '''[[Electromagnetic force]]''' — acts between electrically charged particles; governs everyday phenomena
# '''[[Weak interaction|Weak nuclear force]]''' — responsible for [[beta decay]]
# '''[[Strong interaction|Strong nuclear force]]''' — binds [[quark]]s into [[proton]]s and [[neutron]]s

=== Contact forces ===
Contact forces require physical contact between objects:
* '''[[Normal force]]''' (<math>\mathbf{N}</math>) — perpendicular to the contact surface
* '''[[Friction]]''' (<math>\mathbf{f}</math>) — opposes relative motion; can be [[static friction|static]] or [[kinetic friction|kinetic]]
* '''[[Tension (physics)|Tension]]''' (<math>\mathbf{T}</math>) — transmitted through strings, cables, or rods
* '''[[Spring force]]''' — [[Hooke's law]]: <math>F = -kx</math> for an ideal spring
* '''[[Buoyancy]]''' — upward force exerted by a fluid

=== Non-contact (action-at-a-distance) forces ===
* '''[[Gravity|Gravitational force]]''': <math>F_g = G\frac{m_1 m_2}{r^2}</math>
* '''[[Coulomb's law|Electrostatic force]]''': <math>F_e = k_e\frac{q_1 q_2}{r^2}</math>
* '''[[Lorentz force|Magnetic force on a moving charge]]''': <math>\mathbf{F} = q\mathbf{v} \times \mathbf{B}</math>

== Free body diagrams ==
A [[free body diagram]] (FBD) is a graphical illustration used to visualize the applied forces, movements, and resulting reactions on a body. All forces acting on the object are drawn as vectors originating from the object's center.

== Superposition of forces ==
When multiple forces act on an object, the net (resultant) force is the [[vector sum]]:
:<math>\mathbf{F}_{\text{net}} = \sum_i \mathbf{F}_i</math>

If the net force is zero, the object is in [[mechanical equilibrium|equilibrium]] and does not accelerate.

== Work done by a force ==
{{Main|Work (physics)}}
The [[Work (physics)|work]] <math>W</math> done by a constant force <math>\mathbf{F}</math> over a displacement <math>\Delta\mathbf{r}</math> is:
:<math>W = \mathbf{F} \cdot \Delta\mathbf{r} = F \Delta r\cos\theta</math>

For a variable force along a path <math>C</math>:
:<math>W = \int_C \mathbf{F} \cdot d\mathbf{r}</math>

== Conservative and non-conservative forces ==
{{Main|Conservative force}}
A force is '''conservative''' if the work it does on a particle moving between two points is independent of the path taken. Equivalent conditions:
* <math>\nabla \times \mathbf{F} = 0</math> (in three dimensions)
* <math>\mathbf{F} = -\nabla U</math> for some scalar potential <math>U</math>
* The work around any closed path is zero: <math>\oint \mathbf{F} \cdot d\mathbf{r} = 0</math>

Examples: gravity, electrostatic force, ideal spring force.

'''Non-conservative forces''' (e.g., friction, air resistance, viscous drag) dissipate mechanical energy as heat.

== Impulse ==
{{Main|Impulse (physics)}}
The [[Impulse (physics)|impulse]] <math>\mathbf{J}</math> delivered by a force over a time interval <math>\Delta t</math> is:
:<math>\mathbf{J} = \int_{t_1}^{t_2} \mathbf{F}\, dt = \Delta\mathbf{p}</math>

The impulse equals the change in momentum (impulse–momentum theorem).

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Torque]]
* [[Pressure]]
* [[Stress (mechanics)]]
* [[Centripetal force]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

== Further reading ==
* [[Richard Feynman|Feynman, R. P.]] ''[[The Feynman Lectures on Physics]]'', Vol. 1, Ch. 12.
* [[David Halliday (physicist)|Halliday, D.]], Resnick, R., Walker, J. (2013). ''Fundamentals of Physics'' (10th ed.). Wiley, Ch. 5.

[[Category:Force| ]]
[[Category:Classical mechanics]]
[[Category:Physics]]
