{{Short description|Ripples in spacetime caused by accelerating masses}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Gravitational wave
| image = LIGO measurement of gravitational waves.svg
| caption = First direct detection of gravitational waves by [[LIGO]] in 2015, from a binary [[black hole]] merger.
| topics = [[General relativity]], [[Spacetime]], [[Gravity]], [[Black hole]]
| speed = [[Speed of light]] (c)
| predicted_by = [[Albert Einstein]], 1916
| first_detected = 14 September 2015 ([[LIGO]])
}}

'''Gravitational waves''' are disturbances in the curvature of [[spacetime]] that propagate as waves, travelling outward from accelerating massive objects. They were predicted by [[Albert Einstein]] in 1916 on the basis of his theory of [[general relativity]]. Gravitational waves transport [[energy]] as gravitational radiation.

The first direct detection was made on 14 September 2015 by the [[LIGO]] and [[Virgo interferometer|Virgo]] collaborations, from the merger of two [[black hole]]s approximately 1.3 billion [[light-year]]s away. This discovery was awarded the [[Nobel Prize in Physics]] in 2017.

== Physical properties ==

=== Propagation ===
Gravitational waves travel at the [[speed of light]] <math>c</math>. In the weak-field limit (far from the source), they are described by the linearised Einstein equations as transverse, quadrupole waves.

=== Strain ===
The amplitude of a gravitational wave is measured by its [[strain (physics)|strain]] <math>h</math>:
:<math>h = \frac{\Delta L}{L}</math>
Typical strains are ~10⁻²¹ — a change of one part in a thousand billion billion.

=== Polarization ===
Gravitational waves have two polarization states: "plus" (+) and "cross" (×), reflecting the quadrupole nature of the radiation.

== Generation ==
Gravitational waves are generated by [[quadrupole moment|time-varying mass quadrupole moments]]. Strong sources include:
* Binary [[black hole]] mergers
* Binary [[neutron star]] mergers
* [[Supernova]]e (asymmetric collapse)
* Rotating [[neutron star]]s (with imperfections)
* The early universe (primordial gravitational waves)

== Detection ==
=== Interferometric detectors ===
[[LIGO]] (USA), [[Virgo interferometer|Virgo]] (Italy), and [[KAGRA]] (Japan) use [[Michelson interferometer]]s with 3–4 km arms. A passing gravitational wave changes the relative arm lengths by ~10⁻¹⁸ m.

=== Pulsar timing arrays ===
Networks of [[millisecond pulsar]]s act as a galaxy-scale detector for nanohertz-frequency waves from [[supermassive black hole]] binaries.

== Astrophysical significance ==
* GW150914 (2015) — first detection; binary black hole merger
* GW170817 (2017) — binary neutron star merger; observed in gravitational waves and across the [[electromagnetic spectrum]] ([[multi-messenger astronomy]])
* Provides a new way to observe the [[universe]] beyond [[electromagnetic radiation]]

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Black hole]]
* [[General relativity]]
* [[Gravity]]
* [[LIGO]]
* [[Spacetime]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Gravitational waves| ]]
[[Category:General relativity]]
[[Category:Astrophysics]]
