{{Short description|Natural phenomenon by which all things with mass or energy attract one another}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Gravitation
| image = Solar sys.jpg
| caption = The [[Solar System]], whose motion is governed by [[Newton's law of universal gravitation|Newtonian gravity]]
| topics = [[Newton's law of universal gravitation]], [[General relativity]], [[Gravitational field]], [[Gravitational potential]], [[Kepler's laws of planetary motion]]
}}

'''Gravitation''' (or '''gravity''') is a [[fundamental interaction|natural phenomenon]] by which all things with [[mass]] or [[energy]]—including [[planet]]s, [[star]]s, [[galaxy|galaxies]], and even [[light]]—are brought toward one another. On [[Earth]], gravity gives [[weight]] to physical objects, and the [[Moon]]'s gravity causes the ocean [[tide]]s.

Gravity is most accurately described by the [[general theory of relativity]] (proposed by [[Albert Einstein]] in 1915), which describes gravity not as a force, but as a consequence of the [[curvature of spacetime]] caused by the uneven distribution of mass. For most applications, however, gravity is well approximated by [[Newton's law of universal gravitation]].

== History ==
{{Main|History of gravitational theory}}

=== Early theories ===
[[Aristotle]] believed that heavy objects fall faster than light ones, and that celestial bodies move in perfect circles. [[Galileo Galilei]] (1564–1642) demonstrated that, in the absence of air resistance, all objects fall at the same rate regardless of mass.

=== Newtonian gravitation ===
{{Main|Newton's law of universal gravitation}}
In 1687, [[Isaac Newton]] published his [[law of universal gravitation]] in the ''Principia''. He proposed that every particle attracts every other particle with a force proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them:
:<math>\mathbf{F} = -G\frac{m_1 m_2}{r^2}\hat{\mathbf{r}}</math>
where <math>G = 6.674 \times 10^{-11}\,\text{N·m}^2/\text{kg}^2</math> is the [[gravitational constant]].

=== Einstein's general relativity ===
{{Main|History of general relativity}}
In 1915, [[Albert Einstein]] published the theory of [[general relativity]], which describes gravity as the curvature of [[spacetime]] caused by mass and energy. The [[Einstein field equations]] are:
:<math>G_{\mu\nu} + \Lambda g_{\mu\nu} = \frac{8\pi G}{c^4}T_{\mu\nu}</math>

== Newtonian gravity ==

=== Gravitational field ===
The [[gravitational field]] <math>\mathbf{g}</math> at a point is the gravitational force per unit mass:
:<math>\mathbf{g} = \frac{\mathbf{F}}{m} = -\frac{GM}{r^2}\hat{\mathbf{r}}</math>

Near Earth's surface, <math>g \approx 9.81\,\text{m/s}^2</math>.

=== Gravitational potential ===
The [[gravitational potential]] <math>V</math> is related to the field by <math>\mathbf{g} = -\nabla V</math>. For a point mass:
:<math>V = -\frac{GM}{r}</math>

The [[gravitational potential energy]] of two masses separated by distance <math>r</math> is:
:<math>U = -G\frac{m_1 m_2}{r}</math>

=== Kepler's laws ===
{{Main|Kepler's laws of planetary motion}}
Newton showed that [[Kepler's laws of planetary motion]] follow from the inverse-square law:
# Planets move in elliptical orbits with the Sun at one focus
# A line from the Sun to a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times (<math>dA/dt = \text{constant}</math>)
# The square of the orbital period is proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis: <math>T^2 \propto a^3</math>

=== Escape velocity ===
{{Main|Escape velocity}}
The escape velocity from a body of mass <math>M</math> and radius <math>R</math> is:
:<math>v_e = \sqrt{\frac{2GM}{R}}</math>

For Earth, <math>v_e \approx 11.2\,\text{km/s}</math>.

== General relativity ==
{{Main|General relativity}}

=== Equivalence principle ===
{{Main|Equivalence principle}}
The [[equivalence principle]] states that the effects of gravity are locally indistinguishable from those of acceleration. This is the foundation of general relativity.

=== Spacetime curvature ===
Mass and energy curve [[spacetime]]. Objects in free fall follow [[geodesic]]s — the straightest possible paths in curved spacetime.

=== Experimental tests ===
* [[Perihelion precession of Mercury]] — unexplained by Newtonian gravity, precisely predicted by GR
* [[Gravitational lensing]] — bending of light by massive objects, confirmed in 1919
* [[Gravitational time dilation]] — clocks run slower in stronger gravitational fields
* [[Gravitational wave]]s — first directly detected by [[LIGO]] in 2015
* [[Shapiro time delay]] — light takes longer to pass near a massive object

=== Black holes ===
{{Main|Black hole}}
A [[black hole]] is a region of spacetime where gravity is so strong that nothing, not even light, can escape. The [[Schwarzschild radius]] is:
:<math>R_S = \frac{2GM}{c^2}</math>

== Gravitational waves ===
{{Main|Gravitational wave}}
[[Gravitational wave]]s are ripples in spacetime that propagate at the speed of light, generated by accelerating masses such as orbiting [[binary star]]s or merging [[black hole]]s. They were first directly detected on September 14, 2015, by the [[LIGO]] detectors.

== Applications ==
* [[Celestial mechanics]] — orbital dynamics of planets, satellites, and spacecraft
* [[Gravitational slingshot]] — using planetary gravity for spacecraft propulsion
* [[Tide]] prediction
* [[Gravity gradiometry]] — mineral and oil exploration
* [[Global Positioning System|GPS]] — requires general relativistic corrections
* [[Cosmology]] — structure formation, expansion of the universe

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Gravitational constant]]
* [[Anti-gravity]]
* [[Quantum gravity]]
* [[Graviton]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

== Further reading ==
* [[Isaac Newton|Newton, I.]] (1687). ''[[Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica]]''.
* [[Albert Einstein|Einstein, A.]] (1916). "The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity". ''Annalen der Physik''.
* [[Charles W. Misner|Misner, C. W.]], [[Kip Thorne|Thorne, K. S.]], [[John Archibald Wheeler|Wheeler, J. A.]] (1973). ''Gravitation''. W. H. Freeman.

[[Category:Gravitation| ]]
[[Category:Physics]]
[[Category:Fundamental interactions]]
[[Category:General relativity]]
