{{Short description="Law of elasticity: force needed to extend or compress a spring by some distance"}}
{{Infobox physical law
| name = Hooke's law
| image = Hookes law spring.png
| caption = Extension of a coiled spring is proportional to the applied force.
| formula = <math>F = -kx</math>
| discovered_by = [[Robert Hooke]] (1660)
}}

'''Hooke's law''' is a law of [[physics]] that states that the [[force]] (<math>F</math>) needed to extend or compress a [[spring (device)|spring]] by some distance (<math>x</math>) scales linearly with respect to that distance — that is, <math>F = kx</math>, where <math>k</math> is a constant factor characteristic of the spring (its stiffness), and <math>x</math> is small compared to the total possible deformation of the spring.

The law is named after 17th-century British physicist [[Robert Hooke]], who first stated it in 1660 as a Latin anagram ''ceiiinosssttuv'', which he revealed in 1678 as ''Ut tensio, sic vis'' ("As the extension, so the force").

== Mathematical statement ==
:<math>F = -kx</math>

where:
* <math>F</math> is the restoring force exerted by the spring (N)
* <math>k</math> is the [[Hooke's law#Formal definition|spring constant]] or force constant (N/m)
* <math>x</math> is the displacement from equilibrium (m)

The negative sign indicates that the restoring force is opposite to the displacement. This is a [[restoring force]]: it always acts to return the spring to its equilibrium position.

== Spring constant ==
The spring constant <math>k</math> is a measure of the spring's stiffness:
* Large <math>k</math> → stiff spring
* Small <math>k</math> → soft spring

For identical springs in series: <math>\frac{1}{k_{\text{eff}}} = \frac{1}{k_1} + \frac{1}{k_2} + \cdots</math>
For identical springs in parallel: <math>k_{\text{eff}} = k_1 + k_2 + \cdots</math>

== Elastic potential energy ==
The [[potential energy]] stored in a deformed spring is:
:<math>U = \frac{1}{2}kx^2</math>

This energy is released when the spring returns to equilibrium.

== Stress–strain form (generalized Hooke's law) ==
{{Main|Linear elasticity}}
For a three-dimensional elastic material, Hooke's law generalizes to:
:<math>\sigma_{ij} = \sum_{k,l} C_{ijkl}\,\varepsilon_{kl}</math>
where <math>\sigma_{ij}</math> is the [[Cauchy stress tensor|stress tensor]], <math>\varepsilon_{kl}</math> is the [[strain tensor]], and <math>C_{ijkl}</math> is the stiffness (or elasticity) tensor.

For [[isotropy|isotropic]] materials, this reduces to two independent elastic constants:
* [[Young's modulus]] <math>E</math>
* [[Poisson's ratio]] <math>\nu</math>
* [[Shear modulus]] <math>G = E/[2(1+\nu)]</math>
* [[Bulk modulus]] <math>K = E/[3(1-2\nu)]</math>

== Elastic limit ==
Hooke's law is valid only within the '''[[elastic limit]]''' — the maximum stress beyond which permanent (plastic) deformation occurs. Beyond the elastic limit:
* [[Yield point|Yielding]] occurs
* [[Plasticity (physics)|Plastic deformation]] is permanent
* The linear relationship <math>F \propto x</math> no longer holds

== Simple harmonic motion ==
{{Main|Simple harmonic motion}}
Hooke's law is the foundation of simple harmonic motion. A mass <math>m</math> on a spring oscillates with:
:<math>\omega = \sqrt{\frac{k}{m}}, \quad T = 2\pi\sqrt{\frac{m}{k}}</math>

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Elasticity (physics)]]
* [[Young's modulus]]
* [[Simple harmonic motion]]
* [[Stress–strain curve]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Hooke's law| ]]
[[Category:Elasticity (physics)]]
[[Category:Classical mechanics]]
