{{Short description|Particles that cannot be distinguished from one another in quantum mechanics}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Identical particles
| image = 
| caption = 
| topics = [[Quantum mechanics]], [[Spin (physics)]], [[Pauli exclusion principle]], [[Statistical mechanics]]
}}

In [[quantum mechanics]], '''identical particles''' (also called '''indistinguishable particles''') are particles that cannot be distinguished from each other, even in principle. This is a fundamental quantum effect: two [[electron]]s, [[proton]]s, or [[photon]]s are absolutely identical and cannot be labelled or tracked individually.

== Exchange symmetry ==
The [[wave function]] of a system of identical particles must be either symmetric or antisymmetric under particle exchange.

=== Bosons ===
[[Boson]]s (integer [[spin (physics)|spin]]: 0, 1, 2, …) have symmetric wave functions:
:<math>\Psi(\ldots, \mathbf{r}_i, \ldots, \mathbf{r}_j, \ldots) = +\Psi(\ldots, \mathbf{r}_j, \ldots, \mathbf{r}_i, \ldots)</math>

Multiple bosons can occupy the same quantum state. Examples: [[photon]]s, [[gluon]]s, [[W and Z bosons]], [[helium-4]] atoms.

=== Fermions ===
[[Fermion]]s (half-integer spin: 1/2, 3/2, …) have antisymmetric wave functions:
:<math>\Psi(\ldots, \mathbf{r}_i, \ldots, \mathbf{r}_j, \ldots) = -\Psi(\ldots, \mathbf{r}_j, \ldots, \mathbf{r}_i, \ldots)</math>

This antisymmetry leads directly to the [[Pauli exclusion principle]]: no two fermions can occupy the same quantum state. Examples: [[electron]]s, [[proton]]s, [[neutron]]s, [[quark]]s, [[neutrino]]s.

== Spin–statistics theorem ==
The [[spin–statistics theorem]] (proved by [[Wolfgang Pauli]]) connects spin to statistics: integer-spin particles are bosons; half-integer-spin particles are fermions. This theorem is a fundamental consequence of [[relativistic quantum field theory]].

== Statistical consequences ==
{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Statistics !! Distribution !! Examples
|-
| [[Bose–Einstein statistics]] || Bosons || Photons, liquid helium
|-
| [[Fermi–Dirac statistics]] || Fermions || Electrons in metals, white dwarfs
|}

== Exchange interaction ==
The [[exchange interaction]] between identical particles is a purely quantum effect with no classical analog. It is responsible for:
* [[Ferromagnetism]] and [[antiferromagnetism]]
* [[Chemical bond]]ing in molecules
* The stability of [[white dwarf]]s and [[neutron star]]s (via [[degeneracy pressure]])

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Boson]]
* [[Fermion]]
* [[Pauli exclusion principle]]
* [[Statistical mechanics]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Quantum mechanics]]
[[Category:Particle physics]]
[[Category:Statistical mechanics]]
