{{Short description="Natural laws that define fundamental physical quantities of thermodynamic systems"}}
{{Infobox physical law
| name = Laws of thermodynamics
| image = Carnot engine diagram.svg
| caption = Diagram of a Carnot heat engine, illustrating the fundamental limits imposed by the laws of thermodynamics.
| discovered_by = Various ([[Sadi Carnot|Carnot]], [[Rudolf Clausius|Clausius]], [[Lord Kelvin|Kelvin]], [[Max Planck|Planck]] et al.)
}}

The '''laws of thermodynamics''' are a set of four fundamental laws that define how physical quantities such as [[temperature]], [[energy]], and [[entropy]] behave under various circumstances. They form the foundation of [[thermodynamics]] and apply to all natural processes.

== Zeroth law ==
{{Main|Zeroth law of thermodynamics}}
:''If two thermodynamic systems are each in [[thermal equilibrium]] with a third, then they are in thermal equilibrium with each other.''

This law provides the basis for temperature measurement and establishes [[temperature]] as a fundamental and measurable property of matter. It justifies the use of [[thermometer]]s.

== First law ==
{{Main|First law of thermodynamics}}
:''Energy cannot be created or destroyed in an isolated system.''

Mathematically:
:<math>\Delta U = Q - W</math>
where <math>\Delta U</math> is the change in [[internal energy]], <math>Q</math> is heat added to the system, and <math>W</math> is work done by the system.

This is the thermodynamic statement of the [[conservation of energy]]. Key consequences:
* The internal energy <math>U</math> is a [[state function]]
* A [[perpetual motion machine of the first kind]] is impossible
* [[Joule's experiment]] confirmed the equivalence of heat and work

== Second law ==
{{Main|Second law of thermodynamics}}
:''The total [[entropy]] of an isolated system can never decrease over time.''

:<math>\Delta S_{\text{total}} \geq 0</math>

Equivalent formulations:
* '''Clausius statement:''' Heat cannot spontaneously flow from a colder body to a hotter body.
* '''Kelvin–Planck statement:''' No process is possible whose sole result is the complete conversion of heat into work.
* '''Carnot's theorem:''' The efficiency of any heat engine cannot exceed the [[Carnot efficiency]]: <math>\eta_{\text{max}} = 1 - T_C/T_H</math>.

The second law defines the [[arrow of time]] and explains why certain processes are [[irreversible process|irreversible]].

== Third law ==
{{Main|Third law of thermodynamics}}
:''The entropy of a perfect crystal at [[absolute zero]] is exactly zero.''

As temperature approaches absolute zero, the entropy approaches a minimum. Mathematically:
:<math>\lim_{T \to 0} S = S_0</math>
where <math>S_0 = 0</math> for a perfect crystal.

Consequences:
* It is impossible to reach absolute zero in a finite number of steps ([[unattainability principle]])
* [[Heat capacity|Heat capacities]] approach zero as <math>T \to 0</math>
* The [[thermal expansion coefficient]] approaches zero

== Summary table ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Law !! Statement !! Consequence
|-
| Zeroth || Thermal equilibrium is transitive || Temperature is well-defined
|-
| First || <math>\Delta U = Q - W</math> || Energy conservation
|-
| Second || <math>\Delta S \geq 0</math> || Entropy increases; heat engines have limited efficiency
|-
| Third || <math>S \to 0</math> as <math>T \to 0</math> || Absolute zero is unattainable
|}

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Thermodynamics]]
* [[Entropy]]
* [[First law of thermodynamics]]
* [[Second law of thermodynamics]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Laws of thermodynamics| ]]
[[Category:Thermodynamics]]
[[Category:Scientific laws]]
