{{Short description|Force on a charged particle in an electromagnetic field}}
{{Infobox physical law
| name = Lorentz force
| image = Lorentz force particle.svg
| caption = The Lorentz force <math>\mathbf{F}</math> on a charged particle moving with velocity <math>\mathbf{v}</math> in electric field <math>\mathbf{E}</math> and magnetic field <math>\mathbf{B}</math>.
| formula = <math>\mathbf{F} = q(\mathbf{E} + \mathbf{v} \times \mathbf{B})</math>
| discovered_by = [[Hendrik Lorentz]] (1895)
}}

In [[physics]], specifically in [[electromagnetism]], the '''Lorentz force''' (or '''electromagnetic force''') is the combination of [[electric force|electric]] and [[magnetic force]] on a [[point charge]] due to [[electromagnetic field]]s. A particle of charge <math>q</math> moving with velocity <math>\mathbf{v}</math> in an electric field <math>\mathbf{E}</math> and a magnetic field <math>\mathbf{B}</math> experiences a force:
:<math>\mathbf{F} = q(\mathbf{E} + \mathbf{v} \times \mathbf{B})</math>

The law is named after Dutch physicist [[Hendrik Lorentz]], who formulated it in 1895.

== Components ==

=== Electric force ===
The electric component <math>\mathbf{F}_e = q\mathbf{E}</math> is parallel to the electric field and does work on the particle.

=== Magnetic force ===
The magnetic component <math>\mathbf{F}_m = q\mathbf{v} \times \mathbf{B}</math> is perpendicular to both the velocity and the magnetic field. Key properties:
* Does '''no work''' (<math>\mathbf{F}_m \cdot \mathbf{v} = 0</math>) — it can change the direction but not the [[speed]]
* Magnitude: <math>F_m = qvB\sin\theta</math>, where <math>\theta</math> is the angle between <math>\mathbf{v}</math> and <math>\mathbf{B}</math>
* Direction: given by the [[right-hand rule]]

== Motion in uniform fields ==

=== Uniform electric field ===
A charge in a uniform <math>\mathbf{E}</math> undergoes constant acceleration <math>\mathbf{a} = q\mathbf{E}/m</math>, analogous to projectile motion under gravity.

=== Uniform magnetic field ===
A charge moving perpendicular to <math>\mathbf{B}</math> follows a circular path with:
:<math>r = \frac{mv}{qB}, \quad \omega_c = \frac{qB}{m}</math>
where <math>\omega_c</math> is the [[cyclotron frequency]] and <math>r</math> is the [[gyroradius]] (Larmor radius).

Velocity parallel to <math>\mathbf{B}</math> is unaffected, resulting in [[helix|helical]] motion.

=== Crossed E and B fields ===
With perpendicular <math>\mathbf{E}</math> and <math>\mathbf{B}</math>, particles with a specific velocity <math>v = E/B</math> pass undeflected. This is the principle of the [[velocity selector]] and the [[Wien filter]].

== Continuous charge distributions ==
For continuous distributions, the force density (force per unit volume) is:
:<math>\mathbf{f} = \rho\mathbf{E} + \mathbf{J} \times \mathbf{B}</math>

== Force on a current-carrying wire ==
For a straight wire of length <math>L</math> carrying current <math>I</math>:
:<math>\mathbf{F} = I\mathbf{L} \times \mathbf{B}</math>

== Lorentz force in Maxwell's equations ==
The Lorentz force provides the link between [[Maxwell's equations]] and mechanics. The complete set of Maxwell's equations plus the Lorentz force law describes classical electrodynamics.

== Relativistic form ==
{{Main|Relativistic electromagnetism}}
In [[special relativity]], the Lorentz force is described by the [[electromagnetic tensor]] <math>F^{\mu\nu}</math>:
:<math>\frac{dp^\mu}{d\tau} = qF^{\mu\nu}u_\nu</math>
where <math>p^\mu</math> is the four-momentum and <math>u_\nu</math> is the four-velocity.

== Applications ==
* [[Cathode ray tube]] (CRT) — electron beam deflection
* [[Mass spectrometry|Mass spectrometer]] — charge-to-mass ratio measurement
* [[Cyclotron]] and [[synchrotron]] — particle acceleration
* [[Hall effect]] — voltage generation across a conductor
* [[Magnetohydrodynamics]] — plasma behavior

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Coulomb's law]]
* [[Biot–Savart law]]
* [[Right-hand rule]]
* [[Cyclotron motion]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Lorentz force| ]]
[[Category:Electromagnetism]]
[[Category:Force]]
