{{Short description|Nuclear reaction combining light nuclei into heavier nuclei, releasing energy}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Nuclear fusion
| image = Fusion in the Sun.svg
| caption = The [[proton–proton chain reaction]] in the [[Sun]] fuses hydrogen into helium, releasing energy.
| topics = [[Nuclear physics]], [[Atomic nucleus]], [[Mass–energy equivalence]], [[Binding energy]], [[Plasma (physics)]]
}}

'''Nuclear fusion''' is a [[nuclear reaction]] in which two or more [[atomic nucleus|atomic nuclei]] combine to form one or more different atomic nuclei and [[subatomic particle]]s ([[neutron]]s or [[proton]]s). The process releases or absorbs [[energy]] depending on the masses of the nuclei involved.

Fusion of light elements (up to [[iron-56]]) releases energy because the [[binding energy]] per nucleon increases. This is the process that powers [[star]]s, including the [[Sun]].

== Basic principle ==
For fusion to occur, nuclei must overcome their mutual [[Coulomb's law|electrostatic repulsion]] and approach to within ~1 fm, where the [[strong interaction]] binds them. This requires extremely high temperatures (millions of kelvin) and pressures.

== Energy release ==
The energy released comes from the difference in [[nuclear binding energy|binding energies]]. For the [[deuterium–tritium fusion]] reaction:

:<math>^2\text{D} + ^3\text{T} \rightarrow ^4\text{He} + n + 17.6\ \text{MeV}</math>

This is the most accessible reaction for terrestrial fusion.

== Stellar fusion ==

=== Proton–proton chain ===
In stars like the [[Sun]], the dominant process is the [[proton–proton chain reaction]]:
:<math>4p \rightarrow ^4\text{He} + 2e^+ + 2\nu_e + 26.73\ \text{MeV}</math>

=== CNO cycle ===
In more massive stars, the [[CNO cycle]] dominates, using [[carbon]], [[nitrogen]], and [[oxygen]] as catalysts.

=== Nucleosynthesis ===
Fusion in stars produces elements up to [[iron]]. Heavier elements are formed in [[supernova]]e and [[neutron star merger]]s via rapid [[neutron capture]].

== Terrestrial fusion research ==
* '''[[Tokamak]]''' — magnetic confinement ([[ITER]], [[JET]])
* '''[[Inertial confinement fusion]]''' — laser-driven implosion ([[National Ignition Facility|NIF]])
* '''[[Stellarator]]''' — alternative magnetic confinement geometry

Achieving net energy gain (fusion energy out > input energy) remains the "holy grail" of energy research.

== Contrast with fission ==
{| class="wikitable"
|-
! !! Fusion !! Fission
|-
| Reaction || Light nuclei combine || Heavy nucleus splits
|-
| Energy per reaction || ~17.6 MeV (D–T) || ~200 MeV (²³⁵U)
|-
| Fuel abundance || Very high (hydrogen) || Limited (uranium)
|-
| Radioactive waste || Low || High
|}

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Binding energy]]
* [[Mass–energy equivalence]]
* [[Nuclear fission]]
* [[Nuclear physics]]
* [[Proton]]
* [[Star]]
* [[Sun]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Nuclear fusion| ]]
[[Category:Nuclear physics]]
[[Category:Energy]]
