{{Short description|Branch of physics that studies the behavior and properties of light}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Optics
| image = Light dispersion of a mercury-vapor lamp with a flint glass prism IPNr°0125.jpg
| caption = Dispersion of light by a [[triangular prism (optics)|prism]]
| topics = [[Reflection (physics)|Reflection]], [[Refraction]], [[Diffraction]], [[Interference (wave propagation)|Interference]], [[Polarization (waves)|Polarization]], [[Dispersion (optics)|Dispersion]]
}}

'''Optics''' is the branch of [[physics]] that studies the behavior and properties of [[light]], including its interactions with [[matter]] and the construction of [[optical instruments|instruments]] that use or detect it. Optics usually describes the behavior of [[visible light|visible]], [[ultraviolet]], and [[infrared]] light.

Most optical phenomena can be accounted for using the [[classical electromagnetism|classical electromagnetic]] description of light, but complete electromagnetic descriptions of light are often difficult to apply in practice. Practical optics is usually done using simplified models. The most common of these, [[geometrical optics]], treats light as a collection of [[ray (optics)|rays]] that travel in straight lines and bend when they pass through or reflect from surfaces. [[Physical optics]] is a more comprehensive model of light, which includes wave effects such as [[diffraction]] and [[Interference (wave propagation)|interference]] that cannot be accounted for in geometric optics.

== History ==
{{Main|History of optics}}

Optics began with the development of [[lens (optics)|lenses]] by the [[ancient Egypt]]ians and [[Mesopotamia]]ns, followed by theories on light and vision developed by ancient [[Greek philosophy|Greek philosophers]]. The word ''optics'' comes from the [[Greek language|Greek]] <nowiki>''</nowiki>ta optika<nowiki>''</nowiki>, meaning "appearance, look".

[[Ibn al-Haytham]] (Alhazen), in his ''[[Book of Optics]]'' (1021), correctly explained that vision occurs when light reflects from objects and enters the eye. He also studied [[refraction]], [[reflection]], and the [[camera obscura]].

In the 17th century, [[Isaac Newton]] investigated the [[refraction]] of light, demonstrating that a prism could decompose [[white light]] into a spectrum of colors. [[Christiaan Huygens]] proposed the [[wave theory of light]] in his ''[[Treatise on Light]]'' (1690). [[Thomas Young (scientist)|Thomas Young]]'s [[Young's interference experiment|double-slit experiment]] (1801) provided strong evidence for the wave nature of light. [[James Clerk Maxwell]]'s electromagnetic theory (1865) identified light as an [[electromagnetic wave]].

== Geometrical optics ==
{{Main|Geometrical optics}}

Geometrical optics models light as rays that travel in straight lines in homogeneous media and bend at interfaces between different media. It is valid when the [[wavelength]] of light is much smaller than the size of the optical elements.

=== Reflection ===
{{Main|Reflection (physics)}}
The law of reflection states that the angle of incidence equals the angle of reflection:
:<math>\theta_i = \theta_r</math>

=== Refraction ===
{{Main|Refraction}}
[[Snell's law]] describes the bending of light at the interface between two media with [[refractive index|refractive indices]] <math>n_1</math> and <math>n_2</math>:
:<math>n_1 \sin\theta_1 = n_2 \sin\theta_2</math>

=== Total internal reflection ===
{{Main|Total internal reflection}}
When light travels from a medium with higher refractive index to one with lower refractive index, there is a critical angle <math>\theta_c</math> beyond which all light is reflected:
:<math>\theta_c = \arcsin\left(\frac{n_2}{n_1}\right)</math>

=== Lenses and mirrors ===
{{Main|Lens (optics)|Curved mirror}}
The [[thin lens equation]] relates the focal length <math>f</math>, object distance <math>s_o</math>, and image distance <math>s_i</math>:
:<math>\frac{1}{f} = \frac{1}{s_o} + \frac{1}{s_i}</math>

The [[magnification]] <math>M</math> is:
:<math>M = -\frac{s_i}{s_o}</math>

== Physical optics ==
{{Main|Physical optics}}

=== Interference ===
{{Main|Interference (wave propagation)}}
[[Interference (wave propagation)|Interference]] occurs when two or more waves superpose to form a resultant wave of greater or lower amplitude. In [[Young's double-slit experiment]], bright fringes occur at angles <math>\theta</math> satisfying:
:<math>d\sin\theta = m\lambda, \quad m = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \ldots</math>
where <math>d</math> is the slit separation and <math>\lambda</math> is the wavelength.

=== Diffraction ===
{{Main|Diffraction}}
[[Diffraction]] refers to the bending of waves around obstacles and the spreading of waves through apertures. For a single slit of width <math>a</math>, minima occur at:
:<math>a\sin\theta = m\lambda, \quad m = \pm 1, \pm 2, \ldots</math>

The [[Rayleigh criterion]] for the resolution limit of an optical instrument is:
:<math>\theta_{\text{min}} = 1.22\frac{\lambda}{D}</math>
where <math>D</math> is the aperture diameter.

=== Polarization ===
{{Main|Polarization (waves)}}
[[Polarization (waves)|Polarization]] describes the orientation of the electric field oscillations in an electromagnetic wave. [[Brewster's angle]] <math>\theta_B</math> is the angle at which reflected light is completely polarized:
:<math>\tan\theta_B = \frac{n_2}{n_1}</math>

== Dispersion and scattering ==

=== Dispersion ===
{{Main|Dispersion (optics)}}
[[Dispersion (optics)|Dispersion]] is the dependence of the refractive index on wavelength, which causes white light to separate into its constituent colors. [[Cauchy's equation]] approximates the relationship:
:<math>n(\lambda) = A + \frac{B}{\lambda^2} + \frac{C}{\lambda^4}</math>

=== Scattering ===
{{Main|Scattering}}
[[Rayleigh scattering]] (<math>\propto 1/\lambda^4</math>) explains why the sky is blue: shorter wavelengths are scattered more efficiently. [[Mie scattering]] applies to particles comparable in size to the wavelength.

== Modern optics ==

=== Laser ===
{{Main|Laser}}
The [[laser]] (Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation) produces coherent, monochromatic, and highly directional light. Key principles include [[population inversion]], [[stimulated emission]], and [[optical cavity|optical resonance]].

=== Holography ===
{{Main|Holography}}
[[Holography]] records and reconstructs the full wavefront of light, including both amplitude and phase information, producing three-dimensional images.

=== Fiber optics ===
{{Main|Fiber optics}}
[[Optical fiber]]s transmit light via total internal reflection, enabling high-speed [[optical communication]] over long distances.

=== Quantum optics ===
{{Main|Quantum optics}}
[[Quantum optics]] studies the behavior of light in the quantum regime, including phenomena such as [[photon antibunching]], [[squeezed light]], and [[quantum entanglement]] of photons.

== Applications ==
* [[Corrective lens]]es — eyeglasses, contact lenses
* [[Microscope]]s and [[telescope]]s
* [[Optical fiber]] communication
* [[Laser surgery]], [[laser cutting]], and [[laser printing]]
* [[Photography]] and [[cinematography]]
* [[Spectroscopy]] for chemical analysis
* [[Holography]] for data storage and security

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Electromagnetic spectrum]]
* [[Nonlinear optics]]
* [[Photonics]]
* [[Optical engineering]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

== Further reading ==
* [[Eugene Hecht|Hecht, E.]] (2017). ''Optics'' (5th ed.). Pearson.
* [[Max Born|Born, M.]], Wolf, E. (1999). ''Principles of Optics'' (7th ed.). Cambridge University Press.
* [[Grant R. Fowles|Fowles, G. R.]] (1989). ''Introduction to Modern Optics'' (2nd ed.). Dover.

[[Category:Optics| ]]
[[Category:Physics]]
[[Category:Electromagnetic radiation]]
