{{Short description|Protection scheme where a relay operates when current exceeds a predetermined pickup value}}
{{Infobox physical quantity
| name = Overcurrent protection
| image = 
| caption = Overcurrent protection detects fault currents exceeding normal load levels and initiates tripping after a time delay determined by the current magnitude.
| symbols = <math>I_s</math> (pickup/setting current), <math>I</math> (measured current), <math>t</math> (operating time), <math>\mathrm{TMS}</math> (time multiplier setting)
| SI_unit = [[ampere]] (A), [[second]] (s)
}}

'''Overcurrent protection''' is a fundamental [[power system protection]] scheme in which a [[protective relay]] operates when the [[electric current|current]] in a circuit exceeds a predetermined pickup value. It is the most widely used form of protection, particularly on radial [[electric power distribution|distribution]] systems, as an economical and reliable method for detecting [[short circuit|phase and ground faults]].

== Principle ==

The operating principle is straightforward: the relay continuously measures the line current via a [[current transformer]] (CT) and compares it against the pickup setting <math>I_s</math>:

:<math>\text{Pickup condition: } |I| > I_s</math>

Once the current exceeds the pickup threshold, the relay initiates timing according to its time-current characteristic. When the timer expires, a trip signal is sent to the associated [[circuit breaker]]. The relay resets when the current drops below a dropout threshold (typically 95–98% of pickup for numerical relays).

== Time-current characteristics ==

Overcurrent relays are classified by their time-current characteristic curves:

=== Definite time ===
The relay operates after a fixed time delay regardless of the fault current magnitude (provided current exceeds pickup):

:<math>t_{op} = T \quad \text{for all } I > I_s</math>

Simple to coordinate but may not provide optimal speed for close-in high-magnitude faults. Used in coordination schemes where inverse-time discrimination is difficult.

=== Inverse definite minimum time (IDMT) ===
The operating time decreases as the fault current increases, providing faster tripping for severe nearby faults while allowing coordination with downstream devices. The general IDMT characteristic follows the IEC 60255-151 / IEEE C37.112 standard equation:

:<math>t = \mathrm{TMS} \times \frac{k}{\left(\frac{I}{I_s}\right)^\alpha - 1}</math>

where:
* <math>t</math> — operating time (seconds)
* <math>\mathrm{TMS}</math> — time multiplier setting (0.05–1.0 typical)
* <math>I</math> — measured current (A, or multiple of pickup)
* <math>I_s</math> — pickup/setting current (A)
* <math>k</math>, <math>\alpha</math> — constants defining the curve shape

Standard IEC curve constants:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Curve !! <math>k</math> !! <math>\alpha</math> !! Application
|-
| Standard Inverse (SI) || 0.14 || 0.02 || General-purpose overcurrent and earth-fault protection
|-
| Very Inverse (VI) || 13.5 || 1.0 || Coordination with fuses and thermal characteristics of cables
|-
| Extremely Inverse (EI) || 80.0 || 2.0 || High inrush loads, coordination with transformer magnetizing inrush
|-
| Long Time Inverse (LTI) || 120.0 || 1.0 || Backup ground fault protection with long delays
|}

=== Instantaneous (ANSI 50) ===
The relay operates with no intentional time delay (typically < 20–40 ms including detection time) when current exceeds a separate instantaneous pickup threshold. This provides fast clearing of severe close-in faults.

== Coordination with time-current curves ==

Protection coordination for overcurrent relays is performed graphically using log-log plots (TCC diagrams). The time-current curves of all protective devices on a feeder are overlaid:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Step !! Action
|-
| 1 || Plot all relay time-current curves on the coordination graph
|-
| 2 || Plot the damage curves of protected equipment (transformers, cables, motors)
|-
| 3 || Verify that all relay curves lie below the equipment damage curves
|-
| 4 || Verify coordination margin between successive relays (typically 0.25–0.40 s CTI)
|-
| 5 || Adjust pickup <math>I_s</math> and TMS settings for optimal selectivity and speed
|}

Minimum coordination time interval (CTI) between successive inverse-time relays accounts for breaker interrupting time, relay overshoot, and a safety margin:

:<math>\mathrm{CTI} = t_{CB} + t_{overshoot} + t_{safety}</math>

== Directional overcurrent (ANSI 67) ==

In meshed networks and parallel feeders, fault current can flow in either direction. Directional overcurrent relays add a direction element that compares current phase angle against a voltage reference (polarizing quantity). The directional unit enables the overcurrent element only when current flows in the tripping direction. The operating condition is:

:<math>I > I_s \quad \text{AND} \quad \phi \in [\phi_{MTA} - 90^\circ, \phi_{MTA} + 90^\circ]</math>

where <math>\phi</math> is the phase angle between current and polarizing voltage, and <math>\phi_{MTA}</math> is the maximum torque angle (typically 30°–60° for phase faults, 0°–45° for ground faults).

== Applications ==

Overcurrent protection is applied in diverse scenarios:

* '''Radial distribution feeders''' — Phase (50/51) and ground (50N/51N) overcurrent as primary protection. Coordination with downstream fuses and reclosers.
* '''Transformer backup''' — Overcurrent on the high-voltage side provides backup for transformer differential (87T) and through-fault protection.
* '''Motor protection''' — Thermal overload (49), instantaneous overcurrent (50) for short-circuit, and time-overcurrent (51) for locked-rotor protection.
* '''Generator backup''' — Voltage-controlled or voltage-restrained overcurrent (51V) with pickup that increases at lower voltages to avoid tripping on permissible overloads.
* '''Capacitor bank protection''' — Unbalance overcurrent detection.

== Settings calculation ==

Typical settings procedure:

# '''Phase pickup <math>I_{s,ph}</math>:''' 115–130% of maximum load current, considering emergency loading.
# '''Ground pickup <math>I_{s,gnd}</math>:''' 20–40% of rated CT primary, ensuring sensitivity to high-resistance ground faults.
# '''Instantaneous pickup:''' 125–150% of maximum through-fault current at the relay location, or set to avoid operation for faults beyond the next downstream bus.
# '''TMS:''' Selected to achieve the desired coordination time interval with downstream protection at maximum fault current.

== Limitations ==

Overcurrent protection has inherent limitations:

* '''Varying fault levels''' — System generation and topology changes alter fault current magnitudes, requiring periodic coordination review.
* '''Coordination in complex networks''' — In meshed transmission systems, fault current contributions from multiple sources make simple time-current coordination impractical; [[distance protection]] or line [[differential protection]] is preferred.
* '''High-resistance faults''' — Ground faults with fault resistance exceeding a few tens of ohms may produce currents below pickup thresholds, requiring sensitive earth-fault (SEF) or restricted earth-fault (REF) protection.

== See also ==
{{Portal|Energy}}
* [[Power system protection]]
* [[Protective relay]]
* [[Differential protection]]
* [[Distance protection]]
* [[Circuit breaker]]
* [[Electric power distribution]]
* [[Current transformer]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Electrical engineering]]
[[Category:Electric power]]
