{{Short description|Scientific study of matter, energy, and their interactions}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Physics
| image = CollageFisica.jpg
| caption = Various physical phenomena: [[lightning]], [[galaxy|galaxies]], [[magnet]]s, [[laser]]s, and [[atom]]s
| topics = [[Matter]], [[Energy]], [[Force]], [[Spacetime]], [[Fundamental interaction]]s
}}

'''Physics''' (from [[Ancient Greek|Greek]] <nowiki>''</nowiki>φυσική (ἐπιστήμη)<nowiki>''</nowiki>, ''physikḗ (epistḗmē)'', "knowledge of nature") is the [[natural science]] that studies [[matter]], its [[Motion (physics)|motion]] and behavior through [[spacetime]], and the related entities of [[energy]] and [[force]]. Physics is one of the most fundamental scientific disciplines, and its main goal is to understand how the [[universe]] behaves.

Physics is one of the oldest academic disciplines and, through its inclusion of [[astronomy]], perhaps the oldest. Over much of the past two millennia, physics, [[chemistry]], [[biology]], and certain branches of [[mathematics]] were a part of [[natural philosophy]], but during the [[Scientific Revolution]] in the 17th century, these natural sciences emerged as unique research endeavors in their own right. Physics intersects with many interdisciplinary areas of research, such as [[biophysics]] and [[quantum chemistry]], and the boundaries of physics are not rigidly defined.

== History ==
{{Main|History of physics}}

=== Ancient and medieval ===
Early civilizations studied celestial motions and natural phenomena. [[Aristotle]]'s physics dominated Western thought for nearly two millennia. In the Islamic Golden Age, scholars such as [[Ibn al-Haytham]] (Alhazen) made significant contributions to [[optics]].

=== Scientific Revolution ===
The 16th and 17th centuries saw revolutionary advances: [[Copernicus]] proposed the [[heliocentric model]], [[Galileo Galilei|Galileo]] pioneered experimental physics, and [[Isaac Newton|Newton]] formulated the laws of motion and universal gravitation.

=== 19th century ===
Major developments included [[thermodynamics]], [[electromagnetism]] (culminating in [[Maxwell's equations]]), and the formulation of [[statistical mechanics]].

=== 20th century and modern physics ===
The 20th century brought two revolutionary theories: [[quantum mechanics]] and [[theory of relativity|relativity]] (special and general). The discovery of the [[atomic nucleus]], [[nuclear fission]] and [[nuclear fusion|fusion]], the [[Standard Model]] of particle physics, and the development of [[condensed matter physics]] and [[cosmology]] expanded physics into numerous specialized fields.

== Core theories ==

=== Classical mechanics ===
{{Main|Classical mechanics}}
Describes the motion of macroscopic objects from projectiles to planets. Governed by [[Newton's laws of motion]] and reformulated in [[Lagrangian mechanics|Lagrangian]] and [[Hamiltonian mechanics|Hamiltonian]] frameworks.

=== Electromagnetism ===
{{Main|Electromagnetism}}
Describes the interaction of [[electric charge|electrically charged]] particles via electric and magnetic fields. Unified by [[Maxwell's equations]], which also describe [[light]] as an electromagnetic wave.

=== Thermodynamics and statistical mechanics ===
{{Main|Thermodynamics|Statistical mechanics}}
Thermodynamics studies the relationships between heat, work, temperature, and energy, governed by the four [[laws of thermodynamics]]. Statistical mechanics connects microscopic properties to macroscopic thermodynamic behavior.

=== Quantum mechanics ===
{{Main|Quantum mechanics}}
Describes the behavior of matter and energy at atomic and subatomic scales, characterized by [[quantization (physics)|quantization]], [[wave–particle duality]], and the [[uncertainty principle]].

=== Relativity ===
{{Main|Theory of relativity}}
[[Special relativity]] describes the physics of objects moving at speeds close to the [[speed of light]], while [[general relativity]] describes [[gravity]] as the curvature of [[spacetime]].

== Branches of physics ==
{{Main|Branches of physics}}

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Branch !! Subfields
|-
| [[Classical mechanics]] || [[Statics]], [[Dynamics (mechanics)|Dynamics]], [[Kinematics]], [[Celestial mechanics]], [[Continuum mechanics]]
|-
| [[Electromagnetism]] || [[Electrostatics]], [[Magnetostatics]], [[Electrodynamics]], [[Optics]]
|-
| [[Thermodynamics]] || [[Classical thermodynamics]], [[Statistical mechanics]], [[Kinetic theory of gases|Kinetic theory]]
|-
| [[Quantum mechanics]] || [[Quantum field theory]], [[Quantum electrodynamics]], [[Quantum chromodynamics]]
|-
| [[Relativistic mechanics]] || [[Special relativity]], [[General relativity]], [[Cosmology]]
|-
| [[Atomic, molecular, and optical physics]] || [[Atomic physics]], [[Molecular physics]], [[Spectroscopy]], [[Laser physics]]
|-
| [[Nuclear and particle physics]] || [[Nuclear physics]], [[Particle physics]], [[High-energy physics]]
|-
| [[Condensed matter physics]] || [[Solid-state physics]], [[Nanotechnology]], [[Superconductivity]]
|-
| [[Astrophysics]] || [[Stellar astrophysics]], [[Cosmology]], [[Gravitational physics]]
|-
| [[Applied physics]] || [[Biophysics]], [[Geophysics]], [[Medical physics]], [[Materials science]]
|}

== Fundamental interactions ==
{{Main|Fundamental interaction}}
Physics recognizes four fundamental interactions:
# '''[[Gravity]]''' — mediated by [[graviton]]s (hypothetical), described by [[general relativity]]
# '''[[Electromagnetism]]''' — mediated by [[photon]]s, described by [[quantum electrodynamics]]
# '''[[Weak interaction]]''' — mediated by [[W and Z bosons]], responsible for [[beta decay]]
# '''[[Strong interaction]]''' — mediated by [[gluon]]s, binds quarks in protons and neutrons

Unifying these interactions is one of the greatest challenges in theoretical physics.

== Methodology ==
{{Main|Scientific method}}
Physics progresses through the interplay of theory and experiment:
# Observation of phenomena
# Formulation of hypotheses and theories
# Mathematical modeling
# Experimental testing and verification
# Refinement or rejection of theories

== Unsolved problems ==
{{Main|List of unsolved problems in physics}}
Major open questions include:
* [[Quantum gravity]] — reconciling general relativity with quantum mechanics
* [[Dark matter]] and [[dark energy]] — what constitutes 95% of the universe
* [[Hierarchy problem]] — why gravity is so much weaker than other forces
* [[Arrow of time]] — why entropy increases
* [[Interpretations of quantum mechanics]] — the measurement problem

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Outline of physics]]
* [[Philosophy of physics]]
* [[Physics education]]
* [[Nobel Prize in Physics]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

== Further reading ==
* [[Richard Feynman|Feynman, R. P.]] (1963–65). ''[[The Feynman Lectures on Physics]]''. 3 vols. Addison-Wesley.
* [[Lev Landau|Landau, L. D.]], Lifshitz, E. M. (Course of Theoretical Physics, 10 vols.). Butterworth-Heinemann.
* [[David Halliday (physicist)|Halliday, D.]], Resnick, R., Walker, J. (2013). ''Fundamentals of Physics'' (10th ed.). Wiley.

[[Category:Physics| ]]
[[Category:Natural sciences]]
[[Category:Physical sciences]]
