{{Short description|Static device that transfers electrical energy between circuits via electromagnetic induction}}
{{Infobox physical quantity
| name = Power transformer
| image = 
| caption = A power transformer transfers electrical energy between two or more circuits through [[electromagnetic induction]], with no moving parts.
| symbols = <math>S</math> (apparent power in VA), <math>V_p</math>, <math>V_s</math>, <math>N_p</math>, <math>N_s</math>
| SI_unit = volt-ampere (VA)
}}

'''Power transformer''' is a static [[electrical machine|electrical device]] that transfers [[electrical energy]] between two or more circuits through [[electromagnetic induction]]. A varying [[electric current|current]] in the primary winding produces a varying [[magnetic field|magnetic flux]] in the core, which induces a varying [[electromotive force]] (EMF) across the secondary winding. Power transformers are essential components of [[electric power system]]s, enabling efficient [[electric power transmission|transmission]] and [[electric power distribution|distribution]] by stepping voltage up for long-distance transport and stepping it down for end use.

== Operating principle ==
{{Main|Electromagnetic induction}}
The transformer operates on [[Faraday's law of induction]]. An alternating voltage <math>V_p</math> applied to the primary winding of <math>N_p</math> turns produces an alternating magnetic flux <math>\Phi</math> in the core. This flux links the secondary winding of <math>N_s</math> turns, inducing a voltage <math>V_s</math>. For an ideal transformer:

:<math>\frac{V_p}{V_s} = \frac{N_p}{N_s} = a</math>

where <math>a</math> is the turns ratio. The current relationship in an ideal transformer conserves [[electric power|power]] (<math>S_p = S_s</math>):

:<math>\frac{I_p}{I_s} = \frac{N_s}{N_p} = \frac{1}{a}</math>

The sinusoidal flux in the core is related to the applied voltage by the transformer EMF equation:

:<math>E = 4.44 f N \Phi_{\text{max}}</math>

where <math>f</math> is the [[frequency]] (Hz), <math>N</math> is the number of turns, and <math>\Phi_{\text{max}}</math> is the peak magnetic flux (Wb). For a given voltage, higher frequency allows a smaller core — a key reason aircraft use 400 Hz systems.

The flux density <math>B_{\text{max}}</math> is limited by core material saturation (typically 1.5–1.7 T for grain-oriented silicon steel):

:<math>\Phi_{\text{max}} = B_{\text{max}} A_c</math>

where <math>A_c</math> is the core cross-sectional area.

== Construction ==

=== Core ===
The magnetic core is typically constructed from laminated grain-oriented [[silicon steel]] sheets (0.23–0.35 mm thick) to minimize eddy current losses. Core configurations include:

* Core type — windings surround the core limbs; most common for power transformers
* Shell type — core surrounds the windings; better short-circuit strength
* Three-phase cores — three-limb or five-limb construction

=== Windings ===
Windings are made of [[copper]] or [[aluminum]] conductors, insulated with paper, enamel, or Nomex. Winding types include:

* Layer winding — for lower voltages and smaller ratings
* Disc winding — alternating discs of high and low voltage for mechanical strength
* Helical winding — for high-current, low-voltage windings
* Interleaved (transposed) conductors — to reduce eddy current losses in large conductors

=== Insulation ===
The insulation system must withstand:

* Power-frequency test voltage: typically 2–3 times rated voltage
* Lightning impulse test voltage: standardized BIL (Basic Insulation Level)
* Switching impulse test voltage: relevant for EHV/UHV transformers

Oil-impregnated paper is the traditional primary insulation, with pressboard barriers and oil ducts for cooling.

=== Cooling ===
{{Main|Transformer oil}}
Transformer cooling is designated by IEC 60076 using four-letter codes:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Cooling class !! Internal medium !! External medium !! Circulation
|-
| ONAN || Mineral oil || Air || Natural
|-
| ONAF || Mineral oil || Air || Forced (fans)
|-
| OFAF || Mineral oil || Air || Forced oil, forced air
|-
| ODAF || Mineral oil || Air || Directed oil flow, forced air
|-
| OFWF || Mineral oil || Water || Forced oil, forced water
|}

The temperature rise limits are typically 65 K (top oil) and 78 K (winding hot-spot) above ambient.

== Equivalent circuit ==
The real transformer deviates from ideal behavior due to winding [[electrical resistance|resistance]], leakage [[electrical impedance|reactance]], core losses, and magnetizing current. These are modeled by the equivalent circuit parameters:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Parameter !! Symbol !! Represents !! Physical origin
|-
| Primary resistance || <math>R_p</math> || Copper loss in primary || Winding conductor resistance
|-
| Secondary resistance || <math>R_s</math> (referred to primary: <math>R_s'</math>) || Copper loss in secondary || Winding conductor resistance
|-
| Primary leakage reactance || <math>X_p</math> || Flux that links primary but not secondary || Leakage flux path
|-
| Secondary leakage reactance || <math>X_s</math> (referred to primary: <math>X_s'</math>) || Flux that links secondary but not primary || Leakage flux path
|-
| Magnetizing reactance || <math>X_m</math> || Magnetizing current || Core permeability (nonlinear)
|-
| Core loss resistance || <math>R_c</math> || Hysteresis + eddy current loss || Core material properties
|}

The total impedance voltage (short-circuit impedance) is critical for transformer specification:

:<math>Z_k\% = \frac{I_{\text{rated}} Z_k}{V_{\text{rated}}} \times 100\%</math>

Typical values range from 4% (small distribution transformers) to 20% (large power transformers with fault current limiting).

== Losses and efficiency ==

=== Copper loss (load loss) ===
The <math>I^2R</math> loss in windings varies with load current. For a transformer supplying apparent power <math>S</math> at rated voltage:

:<math>P_{\text{cu}} = I_p^2 R_p + I_s^2 R_s</math>

At any load fraction <math>x = S/S_{\text{rated}}</math>, the copper loss is <math>P_{\text{cu}}(x) = x^2 P_{\text{cu,rated}}</math>.

=== Iron loss (no-load loss) ===
Core losses are present whenever the transformer is energized, independent of load:

* Hysteresis loss: <math>P_h = k_h f B_{\text{max}}^n</math> (Steinmetz equation, <math>n \approx 1.6</math>–2.0)
* Eddy current loss: <math>P_e = k_e f^2 B_{\text{max}}^2 t^2</math> where <math>t</math> is lamination thickness

Total iron loss: <math>P_{\text{Fe}} = P_h + P_e</math>

=== Efficiency ===
Transformer efficiency is among the highest of any electrical machine, exceeding 99% for large units:

:<math>\eta = \frac{P_{\text{out}}}{P_{\text{out}} + P_{\text{Fe}} + P_{\text{cu}}} = \frac{x S_{\text{rated}} \cos\phi}{x S_{\text{rated}} \cos\phi + P_{\text{Fe}} + x^2 P_{\text{cu,rated}}}</math>

Maximum efficiency occurs when variable (copper) losses equal fixed (iron) losses:

:<math>x_{\eta\text{max}} = \sqrt{\frac{P_{\text{Fe}}}{P_{\text{cu,rated}}}}</math>

== Three-phase transformers ==
{{Main|Three-phase electric power}}
Three-phase power can be transformed by:

* A single three-phase transformer unit — more compact, lower cost, less weight
* A bank of three single-phase transformers — redundancy, easier transport

=== Vector groups ===
The phase displacement between primary and secondary line voltages is specified by the vector group (IEC 60076-1). Common connections:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Vector group !! Primary !! Secondary !! Phase shift !! Application
|-
| Yy0 || Star || Star || 0° || Small distribution, no neutral displacement concern
|-
| Yd1 || Star || Delta || −30° || Generator step-up, blocks zero-sequence
|-
| Yd11 || Star || Delta || +30° || Standard distribution step-down
|-
| Dy11 || Delta || Star || +30° || Distribution transformer (LV star for 4-wire)
|-
| Dd0 || Delta || Delta || 0° || Industrial, no neutral required
|}

The phase displacement angle is <math>30^\circ \times n</math> where <math>n</math> is the clock hour (1–11).

The [[Kirchhoff's circuit laws|zero-sequence]] impedance depends on connection — a delta winding provides a circulating path for zero-sequence currents, while a star winding without neutral grounding blocks them.

== Transformer oil and insulation ==
Mineral oil serves both as [[electrical insulation]] (dielectric strength ≈ 70 kV / 2.5 mm gap) and cooling medium. Key oil parameters:

* Dielectric breakdown voltage (IEC 60156): ≥30 kV (new oil), ≥50 kV (after treatment)
* Moisture content: <20 ppm (at factory), <35 ppm (in service for EHV)
* Dissolved gas analysis (DGA, IEC 60599): monitors fault gases — hydrogen (<math>H_2</math>), acetylene (<math>C_2H_2</math>), ethylene, methane, ethane — for incipient fault detection

Alternative insulating fluids include natural esters (vegetable oils) and synthetic esters with higher fire points for indoor and environmentally sensitive installations.

== Tap changers ==

=== On-load tap changer (OLTC) ===
The OLTC adjusts the turns ratio under load to regulate secondary voltage. It is usually located on the HV winding where current is lower. Regulation range is typically ±10% in 9–17 steps of 1.25%. The OLTC operates by momentarily bridging two taps through a transition resistor or reactor:

:<math>\Delta V_s = V_s \cdot \frac{\Delta N_s}{N_s}</math>

=== Off-circuit (de-energized) tap changer ===
Used in smaller distribution transformers, providing ±2.5% or ±5% adjustment in 2–3 steps. Operations require the transformer to be de-energized.

== Parallel operation ==
Transformers can operate in parallel provided they satisfy:

# Same voltage ratio (turns ratio)
# Same vector group (or compatible — e.g., Yd1 and Yd1, not Yd1 and Yd11)
# Same per-unit impedance voltage <math>Z_k\%</math> (within ±10%)
# Same polarity
# Similar X/R ratio

Load sharing is proportional to the inverse of per-unit impedance:

:<math>\frac{S_1}{S_2} = \frac{Z_{k2}\% / S_{\text{rated2}}}{Z_{k1}\% / S_{\text{rated1}}}</math>

== Standards ==
Key international and Chinese standards for power transformers:

* IEC 60076 series — Power transformers (all parts)
* GB/T 1094 series — Chinese equivalent to IEC 60076
* IEEE C57 series — North American standards
* IEC 60076-7 — Loading guide for oil-immersed transformers
* GB 20052 — Minimum allowable energy efficiency (China)

== See also ==
{{Portal|Energy}}
* [[Electromagnetic induction]]
* [[Electrical substation]]
* [[Three-phase electric power]]
* [[Electric power transmission]]
* [[Electric power distribution]]
* [[Electrical impedance]]
* [[Ohm's law]]
* [[Electric_power_system]]
* [[Transformer oil]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Electrical engineering]]
[[Category:Electric power]]
[[Category:Transformers (electrical)]]
