{{Short description|Theory of space and time}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Special relativity
| image = Spacetime cone.svg
| caption = Light cone in [[Minkowski spacetime]]
| topics = [[Spacetime]], [[Lorentz transformation]], [[Time dilation]], [[Length contraction]], [[Mass–energy equivalence]], [[Relativity of simultaneity]]
}}

'''Special relativity''' is a scientific theory of the relationship between [[space]] and [[time]]. In [[Albert Einstein]]'s 1905 treatment, the theory is presented as being based on just two [[postulates of special relativity|postulates]]:

# The [[laws of physics]] are [[Invariant (physics)|invariant]] (identical) in all [[inertial frame]]s of reference (that is, frames of reference with no [[acceleration]]).
# The [[speed of light]] in [[vacuum]] is the same for all observers, regardless of the motion of the light source or observer.

Special relativity has a wide range of consequences that have been experimentally verified, including [[length contraction]], [[time dilation]], [[relativistic mass]], [[mass–energy equivalence]], a universal [[speed limit]], and the [[relativity of simultaneity]].

== History ==
{{Main|History of special relativity}}

The theory was proposed by [[Albert Einstein]] in 1905 in his paper "[[On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies]]" (''Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper''). The incompatibility of [[Newtonian mechanics]] with [[Maxwell's equations]] of electromagnetism and the lack of experimental confirmation of the hypothetical [[luminiferous aether]] led to the development of special relativity.

Key precursors included [[Hendrik Lorentz]] and [[Henri Poincaré]], who independently developed mathematical transformations consistent with the principle of relativity. However, Einstein was the first to provide a complete conceptual framework and physical interpretation.

== Postulates ==
{{Main|Postulates of special relativity}}

=== Principle of relativity ===
The laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames. No physical experiment performed within an inertial frame can detect the uniform motion of that frame.

=== Constancy of the speed of light ===
The speed of light in vacuum, <math>c = 299{,}792{,}458\,\text{m/s}</math>, is the same for all observers, regardless of the relative motion between source and observer.

== Lorentz transformations ==
{{Main|Lorentz transformation}}

Consider two inertial frames <math>S</math> and <math>S'</math>, with <math>S'</math> moving at velocity <math>v</math> along the <math>x</math>-axis relative to <math>S</math>. The [[Lorentz transformation]]s are:

:<math>t' = \gamma\left(t - \frac{vx}{c^2}\right)</math>
:<math>x' = \gamma(x - vt)</math>
:<math>y' = y</math>
:<math>z' = z</math>

where <math>\gamma = \frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - v^2/c^2}}</math> is the [[Lorentz factor]].

The inverse transformations are obtained by replacing <math>v</math> with <math>-v</math>.

== Consequences ==

=== Relativity of simultaneity ===
{{Main|Relativity of simultaneity}}
Two events that are simultaneous in one inertial frame are not necessarily simultaneous in another. The time difference between events in different frames is given by:
:<math>\Delta t' = \gamma\left(\Delta t - \frac{v\Delta x}{c^2}\right)</math>

=== Time dilation ===
{{Main|Time dilation}}
A moving clock runs slower than a stationary clock. If <math>\Delta t_0</math> is the proper time interval (measured in the rest frame), then the dilated time <math>\Delta t</math> in a frame moving at speed <math>v</math> is:
:<math>\Delta t = \gamma\Delta t_0</math>

=== Length contraction ===
{{Main|Length contraction}}
The length of an object measured in the frame in which it is moving is shorter than its proper length <math>L_0</math> (length in its rest frame):
:<math>L = \frac{L_0}{\gamma}</math>

=== Addition of velocities ===
{{Main|Velocity-addition formula}}
The relativistic addition of velocities ensures that no velocity exceeds <math>c</math>:
:<math>u = \frac{u' + v}{1 + \frac{u'v}{c^2}}</math>

== Relativistic mechanics ==

=== Relativistic momentum ===
The relativistic momentum is:
:<math>\mathbf{p} = \gamma m\mathbf{v}</math>

=== Relativistic energy ===
{{Main|Energy–momentum relation}}
The total relativistic energy is:
:<math>E = \gamma mc^2</math>

The [[rest energy]] is:
:<math>E_0 = mc^2</math>

The [[kinetic energy]] is:
:<math>K = (\gamma - 1)mc^2</math>

=== Energy–momentum relation ===
The [[energy–momentum relation]] connects energy, momentum, and rest mass:
:<math>E^2 = (pc)^2 + (mc^2)^2</math>

For massless particles (such as photons), <math>E = pc</math>.

=== Doppler effect ===
{{Main|Relativistic Doppler effect}}
The relativistic Doppler shift for light is:
:<math>f_{\text{obs}} = f_{\text{src}}\sqrt{\frac{1 + v/c}{1 - v/c}}</math>
for longitudinal motion (relative motion along the line of sight).

== Spacetime ==
{{Main|Minkowski spacetime}}

[[Hermann Minkowski]] introduced the concept of four-dimensional [[spacetime]], unifying space and time into a single continuum. The [[spacetime interval]] between two events is invariant across all inertial frames:
:<math>(\Delta s)^2 = (c\Delta t)^2 - (\Delta x)^2 - (\Delta y)^2 - (\Delta z)^2</math>

[[Four-vector]]s provide a concise formulation of special relativity:
* [[Four-position]]: <math>X^\mu = (ct, x, y, z)</math>
* [[Four-momentum]]: <math>P^\mu = (E/c, p_x, p_y, p_z)</math>

== Four-dimensional formulation ==
Maxwell's equations take a particularly elegant form in four-dimensional notation. The [[electromagnetic field tensor]] <math>F^{\mu\nu}</math> encapsulates both the electric and magnetic fields.

== Experimental evidence ==
Key experimental confirmations include:
* [[Michelson–Morley experiment]] — absence of aether drift
* [[Ives–Stilwell experiment]] — time dilation via Doppler shift
* [[Hafele–Keating experiment]] — time dilation with atomic clocks on aircraft
* [[Muon]] lifetime dilation in cosmic rays
* Tests in [[particle accelerator]]s — relativistic momentum and energy verified daily
* [[GPS]] satellites — require relativistic corrections for accurate positioning

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[General relativity]]
* [[Twin paradox]]
* [[Causality]]
* [[Lorentz covariance]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

== Further reading ==
* [[Albert Einstein|Einstein, A.]] (1905). "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies". ''Annalen der Physik''. '''17''': 891–921.
* [[Edwin F. Taylor|Taylor, E. F.]], [[John Archibald Wheeler|Wheeler, J. A.]] (1992). ''Spacetime Physics'' (2nd ed.). W. H. Freeman.
* [[Wolfgang Rindler|Rindler, W.]] (2006). ''Introduction to Special Relativity'' (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press.
* [[Richard Feynman|Feynman, R. P.]] ''[[The Feynman Lectures on Physics]]'', Vol. 1, Ch. 15–17.

[[Category:Special relativity| ]]
[[Category:Physics]]
[[Category:Albert Einstein]]
