{{Short description|Integration of protection, control, monitoring, and communication within a substation using digital technology}}
{{Infobox physical quantity
| name = Substation automation
| image = 
| caption = Substation automation integrates protection, control, monitoring, and communication using digital IEDs and Ethernet networks.
| symbols = 
| SI_unit = 
}}

'''Substation automation''' (SA) is the integration of [[protective relay|protection]], [[control engineering|control]], monitoring, and communication within an [[electrical substation]] using digital technology. It replaces conventional hard-wired relay logic and discrete control panels with microprocessor-based Intelligent Electronic Devices (IEDs) interconnected by [[Ethernet]]-based networks, following the [[IEC 61850]] standard. The goal is improved reliability, interoperability, reduced wiring, and comprehensive diagnostic capabilities.

== Architecture levels ==
Per [[IEC 61850]], the substation automation system (SAS) is organized into three functional levels:

=== Process level ===
The lowest level, where primary equipment resides: [[circuit breaker]]s, [[disconnector]]s, [[instrument transformer]]s ([[current transformer|CT]]s and [[voltage transformer|VT]]s), and [[power transformer]]s. In a fully digital substation, '''merging units''' (MUs) digitize CT/VT analog signals at the source and publish '''sampled values (SV)''' onto the process bus:

:<math>v[n] = A \sin(2\pi f \cdot n T_s + \phi)</math>

where <math>T_s = 1/f_s</math> and <math>f_s = 80</math> samples per cycle (4 kHz at 50 Hz) or 256 samples per cycle (12.8 kHz at 50 Hz) for protection-grade applications per IEC 61869-9.

=== Bay level ===
The bay level contains IEDs that perform protection and control for a specific bay — a [[transmission line]], [[power transformer]], capacitor bank, or bus section. Each bay-level IED:
* Receives sampled values (digitized or analog) from instrument transformers
* Executes protection algorithms (overcurrent, differential, distance, etc.)
* Issues trip commands to circuit breakers via GOOSE messages or binary outputs
* Communicates to the station level via MMS (Manufacturing Message Specification)

=== Station level ===
The station-level equipment includes the station computer (HMI), gateway to the [[SCADA]] control center, engineering workstation, and GPS/IRIG-B time synchronization master. It performs:
* Station-wide interlocking and control
* Alarm aggregation and human-machine interface
* Communication with remote control centers via IEC 60870-5-104 or DNP3
* Disturbance recording and fault analysis

== Intelligent Electronic Devices (IEDs) ==
An IED is a microprocessor-based device that integrates multiple functions previously requiring separate hardware components. A modern protection IED typically combines:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Function !! Conventional equivalent
|-
| Overcurrent protection (50/51) || Separate OC relay
|-
| Distance protection (21) || Separate distance relay
|-
| Differential protection (87) || Separate differential relay
|-
| Auto-reclosing (79) || Separate recloser relay
|-
| Metering (V, I, P, Q, pf) || Separate meters
|-
| Fault recording || Separate disturbance recorder
|-
| Communication || Separate RTU / protocol converter
|}

IEDs communicate horizontally (between bay IEDs) via GOOSE messaging and vertically (to station level) via MMS, all over shared Ethernet infrastructure.

== Communication network ==

=== Network topology ===
The substation LAN is typically an [[Ethernet]] ring or star topology using managed switches. Redundancy is critical for protection-grade reliability:

* '''PRP (Parallel Redundancy Protocol, IEC 62439-3)''': Each IED connects to two independent LANs (A and B). Frames are duplicated; the receiver accepts the first arrival and discards the duplicate.
* '''HSR (High-availability Seamless Redundancy, IEC 62439-3)''': IEDs are connected in a ring with duplicated frame forwarding in both directions.

Both protocols achieve zero recovery time on a single failure — essential for GOOSE-based protection where trip message delivery must occur within 3–4 ms.

=== Process bus ===
The process bus carries sampled values (SV) and GOOSE messages at the process level. Key standards:

* '''IEC 61850-9-2''': Sampled values over Ethernet, typically using 61850-9-2LE (Light Edition) implementation guideline providing 80 samples/cycle at 50 Hz.
* '''IEC 61869-9''': Digital interface for instrument transformers, defining the merging unit and SV format.

Sampled values data rate for a single 80-sample-per-cycle stream:

:<math>R_{\text{SV}} = 80 \times 50 \times \text{frame size} \approx 4-6 \text{ Mbps per stream}</math>

=== GOOSE messaging ===
Generic Object Oriented Substation Event (GOOSE) messages carry real-time protection and control commands — trip, close, blocking, interlocking. GOOSE is publisher-subscriber (multicast on VLAN), not client-server. A GOOSE frame includes:
* Dataset of status values and Boolean commands
* Sequence counter incremented on each state change
* Retransmission with exponential back-off for reliability

GOOSE replaces hundreds of copper wires for inter-bay signaling, dramatically reducing design, installation, and commissioning effort.

=== Station bus ===
The station bus carries MMS (IEC 61850-8-1) communication between IEDs and the station computer. MMS provides client-server services:
* Data read/write — read measurements, write control commands
* Reporting — buffered (BRCB) and unbuffered (URCB) report control blocks for data change, quality change, and integrity reporting
* File transfer — disturbance record upload
* GOOSE for station-wide alarming

== Engineering and configuration ==
Substation automation engineering uses the Substation Configuration Language (SCL) defined in IEC 61850-6. SCL is [[XML]]-based and provides a standardized, vendor-independent description of the entire substation. Key file types:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! File !! Name !! Content
|-
| ICD || IED Capability Description || Template of what a given IED type can do
|-
| SSD || System Specification Description || Substation single-line diagram, required functions
|-
| SCD || Substation Configuration Description || Complete configured system — all IEDs, communication, data flow
|-
| CID || Configured IED Description || The SCD subset for one specific IED (loaded into the device)
|-
| IID || Instantiated IED Description || Description of a pre-configured IED as actually deployed
|}

The engineering workflow proceeds: ICDs + SSD → system configurator → SCD → IED configurator → CID → download to IEDs.

== Conventional vs digital substation ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Aspect !! Conventional substation !! Digital substation (IEC 61850)
|-
| Wiring || Copper cables, point-to-point || Ethernet (fiber/copper), shared network
|-
| Instrument transformers || Analog (1 A / 5 A; 100 V) || Merging units with digital SV (IEC 61869-9)
|-
| Protection signaling || Hard-wired contacts (trip, block) || GOOSE messages on process bus
|-
| Control || Wired mimic panel or RTU || Station HMI with MMS, gateway to SCADA
|-
| Interoperability || Vendor-specific protocols || Standardized data models and services
|-
| Commissioning || Extensive point-to-point testing || Simplified with standardized SCL and testing tools
|-
| Documentation || Paper schematics, wiring tables || SCL files — machine-readable and human-readable
|}

== Benefits ==
* '''Reduced copper wiring''': GOOSE and SV eliminate thousands of copper connections. A typical 220 kV bay reduces from ~500 to ~50 wired connections.
* '''Interoperability''': IEDs from different manufacturers can interoperate using the standardized IEC 61850 data model.
* '''Improved diagnostics''': IEDs provide continuous self-supervision; communication network health is monitored in real time.
* '''Simplified expansion''': Adding a new bay requires only network configuration (SCD update), not physical re-wiring of the marshaling kiosk.
* '''Enhanced safety''': Digital communication reduces the risk of open CT circuits and eliminates high-voltage wiring in control rooms.

== See also ==
{{Portal|Energy}}
* [[IEC 61850]]
* [[SCADA]]
* [[Protective relay]]
* [[Electrical substation]]
* [[Instrument transformer]]
* [[Circuit breaker]]
* [[Power transformer]]
* [[Electric power system]]
* [[Electrical grid]]
* [[Electric power transmission]]
* [[Earthing system]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Substation automation]]
[[Category:Electrical engineering]]
[[Category:Electric power systems]]
[[Category:Industrial automation]]
