{{Short description|Combination of disconnect switches, fuses, or circuit breakers used to control, protect, and isolate electrical equipment}}
{{Infobox physical quantity
| name = Switchgear
| image = 
| caption = Switchgear combines switching, protection, control, and isolation functions in a coordinated assembly for safe and reliable power system operation.
| symbols = <math>U_r</math>, <math>I_r</math>, <math>I_{sc}</math>
| SI_unit = [[volt]] (V), [[ampere]] (A), [[ampere|kA]] for short-circuit withstand
}}

'''Switchgear''' is a coordinated assembly of electrical disconnect switches, [[fuse (electrical)|fuses]], [[circuit breaker]]s, [[instrument transformer]]s, and associated control, measuring, protective, and regulating equipment used to control, protect, and isolate [[electric power system|electrical equipment]]. Switchgear is deployed throughout the [[electrical grid]] — from [[power station]] generation voltage, through transmission and [[electrical substation|substation]]s, to final distribution — providing the means to de-energize equipment for maintenance and to clear faults.

== Types by voltage level ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Class !! Voltage range (IEC) !! Typical applications !! Common technologies
|-
| Low voltage (LV) || Up to 1 kV AC / 1.5 kV DC || Building distribution, motor control centers, industrial panels || Air-break ACB, MCCB, fused switches
|-
| Medium voltage (MV) || 1–52 kV || Primary distribution, industrial plants, infrastructure || VCB, SF<sub>6</sub>, AIS, GIS
|-
| High voltage (HV) || 52–300 kV || Transmission substations, large industrial || SF<sub>6</sub>, GIS, AIS
|-
| Extra-high voltage (EHV) || 300–800 kV || Long-distance transmission grids || SF<sub>6</sub> GIS, dead-tank breakers
|-
| Ultra-high voltage (UHV) || ≥800 kV || Bulk power corridors (China 1,100 kV) || SF<sub>6</sub> GIS exclusively
|}

== Enclosure types ==

=== Metal-enclosed switchgear ===
All live parts are enclosed in an earthed metal enclosure. Subdivided into:

* '''Metal-clad''' — compartments for busbar, circuit breaker, cable connection, and LV control are separated by earthed metal partitions (IEC 62271-200 LSC2B: loss of service continuity category — each compartment can be opened with adjacent compartments live)
* '''Metal-enclosed, compartmented''' — similar but with non-metallic (insulating) partitions between some sections (LSC2A)
* '''Metal-enclosed, non-compartmented''' — single enclosure for all components; lowest cost but maintenance requires complete shutdown

=== Air-insulated switchgear (AIS) ===
Equipment is insulated by air with appropriate clearances. Switchgear ratings dictate minimum phase-to-phase and phase-to-earth distances. Key advantages: lower procurement cost, flexible busbar arrangement, easy extension. Key disadvantage: large footprint. For outdoor AIS at 110 kV, a typical bay occupies approximately 8 m × 20 m.

=== Gas-insulated switchgear (GIS) ===
All high-voltage live parts are enclosed in grounded aluminum alloy enclosures filled with [[SF6|SF<sub>6</sub>]] gas at 4–6 bar. The compactness advantage is dramatic: a 110 kV GIS bay occupies roughly 0.8 m × 3 m, and a 500 kV GIS bay about 3 m × 8 m — only 10–20% of the AIS footprint. SF<sub>6</sub> provides both insulation and, in the circuit breaker interrupter, arc quenching. Modern GIS designs aim for SF<sub>6</sub>-free alternatives (g<sup>3</sup> gas mixture, clean air) to address environmental concerns.

GIS substation design includes:
* Single-phase enclosed — each phase in a separate housing; eliminates phase-to-phase faults
* Three-phase enclosed — all three phases in one housing; compact, used primarily up to 170 kV
* Hybrid — three-phase busbar with single-phase breakers

== Components of switchgear ==

=== Busbars ===
{{Main|Busbar}}
[[Busbar]]s are the main current-carrying conductors that interconnect the incoming and outgoing circuits within the switchgear. Typically aluminum or copper flat bars or tubular conductors. The busbar system must withstand:

* Rated continuous current without exceeding temperature rise limits (e.g., 65 K above 40°C ambient)
* Rated short-time withstand current (typically 25–63 kA for 1–3 seconds)
* Electrodynamic forces during short circuit: <math>F = \frac{\mu_0 i_1 i_2}{2\pi d}</math> per unit length

=== Circuit breakers ===
{{Main|Circuit breaker}}
The primary fault-clearing device. Key ratings aligned with the switchgear: rated voltage <math>U_r</math>, rated normal current <math>I_r</math>, rated short-circuit breaking current <math>I_{sc}</math>.

=== Disconnectors ===
{{Main|Disconnector}}
[[Disconnector]]s (isolating switches) provide a visible break in the circuit when open, ensuring safety for maintenance personnel. They operate only under no-load or negligible current conditions. An interlocking system prevents disconnector operation while the associated circuit breaker is closed.

=== Instrument transformers ===

* [[Current transformer]] (CT) — reduces primary current to a standardized secondary value (1 A or 5 A) for metering and protection. The transformation ratio is defined by:

:<math>I_p = n \cdot I_s</math>

where <math>n = N_s/N_p</math> is the turns ratio.

* [[Voltage transformer]] (VT), also called potential transformer (PT) — reduces primary voltage for measurement:

:<math>V_p = n \cdot V_s</math>

where secondary nominal voltage is typically 100 V or 100/√3 V (IEC).

Accuracy classes for metering CTs: 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0, 3.0. For protection CTs: 5P, 10P (with accuracy limit factor).

=== Protection relays ===
{{Main|Protective relay}}
Numerical (microprocessor-based) relays provide multiple protection functions:
* Overcurrent (50/51)
* Differential (87) — comparing current entering and leaving the protected zone
* Distance/impedance (21) — measuring <math>Z = V/I</math> to detect fault location
* Busbar protection (87B) — high-impedance or low-impedance differential
* Breaker failure (50BF) — backup tripping if primary breaker fails to open

Modern relays communicate via [[IEC 61850]] GOOSE messages, enabling fast, flexible interlocking and tripping schemes.

== LV switchgear ==
Low-voltage switchgear (up to 1,000 V AC) uses withdrawable (draw-out) or fixed circuit breaker designs. Key features:

* Form of separation (IEC 61439-2): Form 1 (no separation) through Form 4b (full separation of busbar, functional units, and terminals)
* Typical busbar rating: 1,600–6,300 A
* Typical short-circuit withstand: 50–100 kA (1 s)
* Incoming unit: ACB with electronic trip unit
* Outgoing feeders: MCCB or fused switch-disconnectors

== MV switchgear ==
Medium-voltage metal-clad switchgear (1–52 kV) is characterized by:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Feature !! AIS (air-insulated) !! GIS (gas-insulated)
|-
| Insulation medium || Air at atmospheric pressure || SF<sub>6</sub> (or alternative gas) at ~1.3–1.5 bar (insulation compartments)
|-
| Circuit breaker || Withdrawable VCB or fixed VCB in air || Fixed VCB or SF<sub>6</sub> CB in gas
|-
| Busbar insulation || Air, with sleeving or barriers || Gas-insulated or solid-insulated
|-
| Footprint per panel || ~0.65–1.0 m width × ~1.5–2.2 m depth || ~0.4–0.6 m width × ~1.0–1.8 m depth
|-
| Maintenance || Periodic cleaning, contact inspection || Sealed for life (≥30 years), minimal maintenance
|}

== HV switchgear ==
For 110 kV and above, GIS is the predominant technology for new urban and space-constrained installations. A typical 110 kV GIS bay integrates:

* Busbar disconnector and earthing switch
* Circuit breaker
* Current transformers (toroidal cores around the conductor inside gas enclosure)
* Line disconnector and high-speed earthing switch
* Voltage transformer (inductive or capacitive)
* Cable sealing end or GIS-to-AIS bushing (SF<sub>6</sub>/air)

== Busbar systems and arrangements ==
The busbar arrangement determines the operational flexibility and reliability:

* Single busbar — simple, low cost; fault takes out entire switchgear
* Single busbar with sectionalizer — improved availability; two sections
* Double busbar — high flexibility; each circuit transferable between buses
* Main-and-transfer bus — dedicated transfer bus for maintenance bypass
* Breaker-and-a-half (1½-breaker) — two circuit breakers per circuit pair; highest reliability, standard for EHV/UHV
* Ring bus — breakers in a closed ring; economical for up to ~6 circuits

For EHV, the 1½-breaker scheme ensures no circuit interruption for any single breaker maintenance or busbar fault. The number of breakers required is:

:<math>n_{\text{breakers}} = \frac{3}{2} n_{\text{circuits}}</math>

== Interlocking and safety ==
Mechanical and electrical interlocking prevents dangerous operational sequences:

* Disconnector cannot be operated while its associated circuit breaker is closed
* Earthing switch cannot be closed unless the disconnector is open (and vice versa)
* Circuit breaker cannot be racked in/out while closed
* Panel door cannot be opened unless all circuits are isolated and earthed
* Capacitive voltage presence indicators (VPIS) confirm dead condition

The five fundamental safety rules (IEC 50110):
# Isolate completely
# Secure against reconnection
# Verify absence of voltage
# Earth and short-circuit
# Cover or barrier adjacent live parts

== Standards ==

* IEC 62271-1 — Common specifications for HV switchgear
* IEC 62271-200 — AC metal-enclosed switchgear for rated voltages above 1 kV and up to 52 kV
* IEC 62271-203 — Gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear for rated voltages above 52 kV
* IEC 61439 series — LV switchgear and controlgear assemblies
* GB 3906 — Chinese standard: AC metal-enclosed switchgear for 3.6–40.5 kV
* GB 7674 — Chinese standard: Gas-insulated metal-enclosed switchgear for ≥72.5 kV

== See also ==
{{Portal|Energy}}
* [[Circuit breaker]]
* [[Disconnector]]
* [[Busbar]]
* [[Electrical substation]]
* [[Protective relay]]
* [[Current transformer]]
* [[Electric power system]]
* [[Electric power distribution]]
* [[SF6]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Electrical engineering]]
[[Category:Electric power]]
[[Category:Switchgear]]
