{{Short description|AC generator whose rotor rotates at synchronous speed, producing electric power at grid frequency}}
{{Infobox physical quantity
| name = Synchronous generator
| image = 
| caption = A synchronous generator converts mechanical power to three-phase AC electrical power, with its rotor magnetically locked to the rotating stator field.
| symbols = <math>P</math> (active power in W), <math>Q</math> (reactive power in var), <math>\delta</math> (load angle), <math>E_f</math> (excitation EMF), <math>X_s</math> (synchronous reactance)
| SI_unit = [[watt]] (W) for active power, [[volt-ampere]] (VA) for apparent power, [[volt-ampere reactive|var]] for reactive power
}}

'''Synchronous generator''', also known as an '''alternator''', is an [[electric generator|AC generator]] in which the [[rotor (electric)|rotor]] rotates at a speed precisely synchronized with the [[rotating magnetic field]] produced by [[three-phase electric power|three-phase]] [[electric current|currents]] in the [[stator]] windings. The synchronous speed <math>n_s</math> is determined by the supply [[frequency]] <math>f</math> and the number of magnetic poles <math>P</math>:

:<math>n_s = \frac{120\,f}{P}</math>

where <math>n_s</math> is in revolutions per minute (rpm), <math>f</math> is in [[hertz]] (Hz), and <math>P</math> is the number of poles (must be even). For a 2-pole machine at 50 Hz, <math>n_s = 3000</math> rpm; at 60 Hz, <math>n_s = 3600</math> rpm. Four-pole machines run at 1500/1800 rpm respectively.

Synchronous generators are the primary source of [[electric power]] in utility grids, converting mechanical energy from [[steam turbine]]s, [[gas turbine]]s, [[water turbine]]s, and [[wind turbine]]s into electrical energy.

== Operating principle ==
{{Main|Electromagnetic induction}}
The operating principle is based on [[Faraday's law of induction]]. A DC [[excitation (electrical)|excitation]] current <math>I_f</math> flowing in the rotor field winding produces a steady magnetic flux <math>\Phi_f</math>. When the rotor is driven by a [[prime mover]], this flux sweeps past the three-phase stator windings, inducing a sinusoidal [[electromotive force]] (EMF) in each phase winding:

:<math>E_f = 4.44\, f\, N\, \Phi_f\, k_w</math>

where <math>N</math> is the number of series turns per phase, <math>\Phi_f</math> is the flux per pole (in [[weber (unit)|webers]]), and <math>k_w</math> is the winding factor (typically 0.85–0.95, accounting for distribution and pitch factors).

The three induced EMFs are displaced by 120 electrical degrees, producing a balanced [[three-phase electric power|three-phase]] output:

:<math>e_a(t) = E_m \sin(\omega t)</math>
:<math>e_b(t) = E_m \sin(\omega t - 120^\circ)</math>
:<math>e_c(t) = E_m \sin(\omega t + 120^\circ)</math>

== Construction ==

=== Cylindrical-rotor (turbo-generator) ===
Used for high-speed applications (2-pole: 3000/3600 rpm; 4-pole: 1500/1800 rpm). The rotor is a solid forged steel cylinder with slots machined for the field winding. Typically driven by [[steam turbine]]s or [[gas turbine]]s in thermal power plants. Diameter is limited by centrifugal stress (typically ≤ 1.2 m for 3000 rpm). Rotor cooling may use hydrogen at 2–6 bar for machines above 100 MVA.

=== Salient-pole generator ===
Used for low-speed applications (typically 75–750 rpm) driven by [[water turbine|hydro turbines]]. The rotor has projecting (salient) poles with concentrated field windings. The large diameter (up to 15 m or more) accommodates many poles (12–100+). Air-gap flux distribution is non-sinusoidal, introducing saliency effects modeled by [[two-axis theory|d-q axis theory]] with direct-axis reactance <math>X_d</math> and quadrature-axis reactance <math>X_q</math>.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Feature !! Cylindrical rotor !! Salient pole
|-
| Speed || 1500–3600 rpm || 50–750 rpm
|-
| Prime mover || Steam, gas turbine || Hydro turbine
|-
| Rotor diameter || ≤ 1.2 m || Up to 15 m+
|-
| Number of poles || 2 or 4 || 12–100+
|-
| Air gap || Uniform || Non-uniform
|-
| <math>X_d / X_q</math> ratio || ≈ 1.0–1.1 || 1.1–2.0
|-
| Cooling || H<sub>2</sub> or air || Air or direct water
|}

== Excitation systems ==

* '''Brushless excitation''' — a pilot exciter (PMG) feeds a main AC exciter on the same shaft; the exciter output is rectified by [[rotating diodes]] mounted on the rotor, eliminating [[brush (electric)|brushes]] and [[slip ring]]s. Dominant in modern large generators.
* '''Static excitation''' — DC current is supplied to the rotor field winding through slip rings and brushes from a [[rectifier|thyristor rectifier]] fed from the generator terminals or an auxiliary source. Fast response; allows [[power system stabilizer|PSS]] injection.
* '''DC exciter (legacy)''' — a separate DC generator on the shaft; largely obsolete in new installations.

== Phasor diagram and equivalent circuit ==

For a cylindrical-rotor machine (neglecting saturation and armature resistance), the per-phase [[phasor]] equation is:

:<math>\bar{E}_f = \bar{V}_t + j\bar{I}_a X_s</math>

where <math>\bar{E}_f</math> is the excitation EMF (internal voltage), <math>\bar{V}_t</math> is the terminal voltage, <math>\bar{I}_a</math> is the armature current, and <math>X_s</math> is the synchronous reactance (sum of armature leakage reactance and armature reaction reactance).

The load angle <math>\delta</math> is the electrical angle by which <math>\bar{E}_f</math> leads <math>\bar{V}_t</math>. It is a critical parameter for stability.

== Power-angle characteristic ==

For a cylindrical-rotor machine connected to an [[infinite bus]] (constant voltage <math>V_t</math>), the three-phase active power is:

:<math>P = \frac{3\,E_f V_t}{X_s} \sin\delta</math>

The maximum (steady-state stability limit) occurs at <math>\delta = 90^\circ</math>:

:<math>P_{\text{max}} = \frac{3\,E_f V_t}{X_s}</math>

For salient-pole machines, an additional reluctance torque term appears due to <math>X_d \neq X_q</math>:

:<math>P = \frac{3\,E_f V_t}{X_d}\sin\delta + \frac{3\,V_t^2}{2}\left(\frac{1}{X_q} - \frac{1}{X_d}\right)\sin 2\delta</math>

The reactive power is:

:<math>Q = \frac{3\,E_f V_t}{X_s}\cos\delta - \frac{3\,V_t^2}{X_s}</math>

== Synchronous reactance and short-circuit ratio ==

The '''synchronous reactance''' <math>X_s</math> (or <math>X_d</math> in salient-pole machines) is a key parameter. The '''short-circuit ratio''' (SCR) is defined as:

:<math>\text{SCR} = \frac{I_{f,\text{OC at rated voltage}}}{I_{f,\text{SC at rated current}}} = \frac{1}{X_d \text{ (saturated, pu)}}</math>

A higher SCR (lower <math>X_d</math>) means a "stiffer" machine with better voltage regulation and higher stability margins, but a physically larger and more expensive design. Typical SCR values: 0.45–0.7 for turbo-generators, 0.9–1.2 for hydro-generators.

== Parallel operation ==
{{Main|Synchronization (alternating current)}}
Connecting a synchronous generator to an energized [[electrical grid|grid]] requires synchronization — matching the following conditions before closing the [[circuit breaker]]:

# '''Voltage magnitude''' — generator terminal voltage must equal bus voltage
# '''Frequency''' — generator frequency must match system frequency (within ~0.1–0.2 Hz)
# '''Phase sequence''' — must be identical (L1, L2, L3)
# '''Phase angle''' — voltage waveforms must be in phase coincidence (< 5°–10° difference)

Modern [[power plant]]s use automatic synchronizers. Manual synchronization with synchroscope and synchronizing lamps is still used in smaller installations.

== Capability curve ==
The generator capability (D-curve) defines the allowable operating region in the P-Q plane, bounded by:

* '''Rotor (field) heating limit''' — maximum field current, a circle centered on the Q-axis
* '''Stator (armature) heating limit''' — maximum armature current <math>I_a</math>, a circle centered at the origin
* '''Steady-state stability limit''' — theoretical limit at <math>\delta = 90^\circ</math>, typically de-rated with a 10–15° margin
* '''Under-excitation limit''' — minimum excitation to maintain stability and avoid stator end-iron overheating
* '''Prime mover limit''' — maximum mechanical power from the turbine

== Generator models ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Model !! Reactances !! Time constants !! Application
|-
| Classical || <math>X'_d</math> || — || First-swing transient stability
|-
| Transient || <math>X_d, X'_d, X_q</math> || <math>T'_{do}</math> || Multi-swing stability, relay testing
|-
| Subtransient || <math>X''_d, X''_q</math> added || <math>T''_{do}</math> added || Short-circuit studies, EMTP-type simulations
|}

The subtransient model is essential for [[short circuit|short-circuit]] calculations, especially for determining the initial symmetrical current <math>I''_k</math> and peak current <math>i_p</math>.

== Applications ==

* '''Thermal power plants''' — 2-pole or 4-pole cylindrical-rotor turbo-generators, rated 50–1,800 MVA, at 3000/3600 rpm or 1500/1800 rpm
* '''Hydroelectric plants''' — salient-pole generators, rated 1–800 MVA, at 75–750 rpm (e.g., [[Three Gorges Dam]]: 700 MW, 75 rpm, 80 poles)
* '''Gas turbine generators''' — often 2-pole cylindrical rotor, 10–400 MVA, fast-start capability
* '''Wind turbine generators''' — direct-drive [[permanent magnet synchronous generator]] (PMSG) eliminates gearbox; full-power converter decouples machine frequency from grid frequency
* '''Synchronous condensers''' — generators operated without a prime mover, used for [[power factor|reactive power compensation]] and inertia support

== See also ==
{{Portal|Energy}}
* [[Electric generator]]
* [[Electric motor]]
* [[Three-phase electric power]]
* [[Power system protection]]
* [[Power factor]]
* [[Electromagnetic induction]]
* [[Electric power system]]
* [[Electrical substation]]
* [[Short circuit]]
* [[Switchgear]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Electrical engineering]]
[[Category:Electric power]]
[[Category:Electrical generators]]
[[Category:Electric motors]]
