{{Short description|Branch of physics concerned with heat, work, and temperature}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Thermodynamics
| image = Thermodynamic system01b.png
| caption = A [[thermodynamic system]] exchanging heat and work with its surroundings
| topics = [[Heat]], [[Work (thermodynamics)|Work]], [[Temperature]], [[Entropy]], [[Internal energy]], [[Laws of thermodynamics]]
}}

'''Thermodynamics''' is a branch of [[physics]] that deals with [[heat]], [[Work (thermodynamics)|work]], and [[temperature]], and their relation to [[energy]], [[entropy]], and the physical properties of matter and [[radiation]]. The behavior of these quantities is governed by the four [[laws of thermodynamics]], which convey a quantitative description using measurable macroscopic physical quantities.

Thermodynamics applies to a wide variety of topics in science and engineering, especially [[physical chemistry]], [[biochemistry]], [[chemical engineering]], and [[mechanical engineering]], as well as other complex fields such as [[meteorology]].

== History ==
{{Main|History of thermodynamics}}

The history of thermodynamics traces back to [[Otto von Guericke]] in 1650, who designed and built the world's first [[vacuum pump]]. In 1662, [[Robert Boyle]] discovered [[Boyle's law]], relating the pressure and volume of a gas at constant temperature.

The development of the [[steam engine]] spurred interest in the efficiency of heat engines. In 1824, [[Nicolas Léonard Sadi Carnot|Sadi Carnot]] published ''[[Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire]]'', establishing the theoretical maximum efficiency of a heat engine, now known as the [[Carnot efficiency]].

In the 1840s, [[James Prescott Joule]] demonstrated the [[mechanical equivalent of heat]], establishing that heat is a form of energy. [[William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin|Lord Kelvin]] and [[Rudolf Clausius]] formalized the first and second laws of thermodynamics. Clausius introduced the concept of [[entropy]] in 1865.

[[Josiah Willard Gibbs]] made fundamental advances in the 1870s with his work on [[chemical thermodynamics]], and [[Ludwig Boltzmann]] provided a statistical interpretation of entropy.

== Laws of thermodynamics ==
{{Main|Laws of thermodynamics}}

=== Zeroth law ===
{{Main|Zeroth law of thermodynamics}}
If two thermodynamic systems are each in [[thermal equilibrium]] with a third, then they are in thermal equilibrium with each other. This law provides the basis for temperature measurement and the definition of a [[thermometer]].

=== First law ===
{{Main|First law of thermodynamics}}
The first law is a statement of the [[conservation of energy]] for thermodynamic systems. The change in the [[internal energy]] <math>\Delta U</math> of a system equals the net heat <math>Q</math> added to the system minus the net work <math>W</math> done by the system:
:<math>\Delta U = Q - W</math>

In differential form:
:<math>dU = \delta Q - \delta W</math>

The first law implies that a [[perpetual motion machine of the first kind]] is impossible.

=== Second law ===
{{Main|Second law of thermodynamics}}
The second law states that the total [[entropy]] of an isolated system can never decrease over time:
:<math>\Delta S_{\text{total}} \geq 0</math>

Equivalent formulations include:
* '''Clausius statement:''' Heat cannot spontaneously flow from a colder body to a hotter body.
* '''Kelvin–Planck statement:''' It is impossible to convert heat completely into work in a cyclic process.
* '''Carnot's theorem:''' No heat engine can be more efficient than a [[Carnot heat engine|Carnot engine]] operating between the same temperatures.

=== Third law ===
{{Main|Third law of thermodynamics}}
As the temperature of a system approaches [[absolute zero]], the entropy approaches a minimum value. For a perfect crystal at absolute zero, the entropy is exactly zero.

== Thermodynamic systems ==
{{Main|Thermodynamic system}}

A thermodynamic system is a precisely defined region of the universe under study. Everything outside the system is the surroundings or environment. Systems are classified as:
* '''Open system''' — exchanges both energy and matter with surroundings
* '''Closed system''' — exchanges energy but not matter
* '''Isolated system''' — exchanges neither energy nor matter

== Thermodynamic processes ==
{{Main|Thermodynamic process}}

Common thermodynamic processes include:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Process !! Constant quantity
|-
| [[Isothermal process|Isothermal]] || Temperature <math>T</math>
|-
| [[Isobaric process|Isobaric]] || Pressure <math>P</math>
|-
| [[Isochoric process|Isochoric]] (isovolumetric) || Volume <math>V</math>
|-
| [[Adiabatic process|Adiabatic]] || No heat exchange (<math>Q = 0</math>)
|-
| [[Reversible process (thermodynamics)|Reversible]] || System and surroundings can return to initial state
|-
| [[Quasistatic process|Quasistatic]] || Infinitely slow, system remains in equilibrium
|}

== Thermodynamic variables ==

=== State functions ===
[[State function]]s depend only on the current state of the system, not on the path taken to reach it:
* '''[[Internal energy]]''' (<math>U</math>) — total energy contained within the system
* '''[[Enthalpy]]''' (<math>H = U + PV</math>) — useful for constant-pressure processes
* '''[[Entropy]]''' (<math>S</math>) — measure of disorder or randomness
* '''[[Helmholtz free energy]]''' (<math>F = U - TS</math>) — useful for constant-temperature, constant-volume processes
* '''[[Gibbs free energy]]''' (<math>G = H - TS</math>) — useful for constant-temperature, constant-pressure processes

=== Thermodynamic potentials ===
The four [[thermodynamic potential]]s are related by [[Legendre transformation]]s:
:<math>dU = T\,dS - P\,dV + \mu\,dN</math>
:<math>dH = T\,dS + V\,dP + \mu\,dN</math>
:<math>dF = -S\,dT - P\,dV + \mu\,dN</math>
:<math>dG = -S\,dT + V\,dP + \mu\,dN</math>

=== Maxwell relations ===
{{Main|Maxwell relations}}
From the exact differentials of the thermodynamic potentials, the [[Maxwell relations]] provide connections between partial derivatives, such as:
:<math>\left(\frac{\partial T}{\partial V}\right)_S = -\left(\frac{\partial P}{\partial S}\right)_V</math>

== Ideal gas law ==
{{Main|Ideal gas law}}
The [[ideal gas law]] relates pressure, volume, temperature, and the amount of gas:
:<math>PV = nRT</math>
where <math>R = 8.314\,\text{J/(mol·K)}</math> is the [[gas constant|universal gas constant]].

Equivalently, in terms of the number of molecules <math>N</math>:
:<math>PV = Nk_B T</math>
where <math>k_B = 1.381 \times 10^{-23}\,\text{J/K}</math> is the [[Boltzmann constant]].

== Heat engines and refrigerators ==
{{Main|Heat engine}}

The efficiency <math>\eta</math> of a heat engine is:
:<math>\eta = \frac{W_{\text{out}}}{Q_{\text{in}}} = 1 - \frac{Q_{\text{out}}}{Q_{\text{in}}}</math>

The maximum theoretical efficiency is the [[Carnot efficiency]]:
:<math>\eta_{\text{Carnot}} = 1 - \frac{T_C}{T_H}</math>
where <math>T_C</math> and <math>T_H</math> are the cold and hot reservoir temperatures (in [[kelvin]]s).

For [[refrigerator]]s and [[heat pump]]s, the figure of merit is the [[coefficient of performance]] (COP).

== Statistical mechanics ==
{{Main|Statistical mechanics}}
Statistical mechanics provides a microscopic foundation for thermodynamics by expressing macroscopic thermodynamic quantities in terms of the statistical behavior of microscopic constituents. The [[Boltzmann entropy formula]] connects entropy to the number of [[microstate (statistical mechanics)|microstates]]:
:<math>S = k_B \ln \Omega</math>

== Applications ==
* [[Power generation]] — [[steam turbine]]s, [[internal combustion engine]]s
* [[HVAC|Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning]]
* [[Chemical engineering]] — reaction equilibria, phase transitions
* [[Meteorology]] — atmospheric thermodynamics
* [[Astrophysics]] — stellar structure, [[black hole thermodynamics]]
* [[Materials science]] — phase diagrams, alloy design

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Heat transfer]]
* [[Phase transition]]
* [[Kinetic theory of gases]]
* [[Non-equilibrium thermodynamics]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

== Further reading ==
* [[Enrico Fermi|Fermi, E.]] (1956). ''Thermodynamics''. Dover Publications.
* [[Herbert Callen|Callen, H. B.]] (1985). ''Thermodynamics and an Introduction to Thermostatistics'' (2nd ed.). Wiley.
* [[Lev Landau|Landau, L. D.]], Lifshitz, E. M. (1980). ''Statistical Physics'', Part 1 (3rd ed.). Butterworth-Heinemann.

[[Category:Thermodynamics| ]]
[[Category:Heat transfer]]
[[Category:Physics]]
