{{Short description="Dimension in which events occur in apparently irreversible succession}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Time
| image = 
| caption = 
| topics = [[Spacetime]], [[Special relativity]], [[Entropy]], [[Second law of thermodynamics]]
| SI_unit = [[second]] (s)
| measurable = yes
}}

'''Time''' is the continued [[sequence]] of existence and events that occurs in an apparently irreversible succession from the [[past]], through the [[present]], and into the [[future]]. It is a component quantity of various measurements used to sequence events, to compare the duration of events or the intervals between them, and to quantify [[rate (mathematics)|rates]] of change.

In [[physics]], time is one of the fundamental quantities along with [[space]], combined into the four-dimensional [[spacetime]] of [[special relativity|special]] and [[general relativity]].

== Operational definition ==
The [[SI unit]] of time is the [[second]], defined as the duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between two [[hyperfine structure|hyperfine levels]] of the ground state of the [[caesium-133]] atom.

== Time in classical mechanics ==
In [[Newtonian mechanics]], time is absolute — it passes uniformly and independently of observers. The temporal coordinate <math>t</math> is the same for all reference frames.

== Time in relativity ==

=== Special relativity ===
{{Main|Special relativity}}
In special relativity, time is relative — the measured time interval between events depends on the observer's motion. The [[Lorentz transformation]] relates time coordinates between frames:
:<math>t' = \gamma\left(t - \frac{vx}{c^2}\right)</math>

=== Time dilation ===
{{Main|Time dilation}}
Moving clocks run slower: <math>\Delta t' = \gamma\Delta t</math>

=== Relativity of simultaneity ===
Events simultaneous in one frame are not simultaneous in another moving relative to the first.

=== General relativity ===
{{Main|General relativity}}
Gravitational time dilation: clocks run slower in stronger gravitational fields.
:<math>\Delta t' = \Delta t\sqrt{1 - \frac{2GM}{rc^2}}</math>

== Arrow of time ==
{{Main|Arrow of time}}
Why time appears to flow in only one direction:
* '''Thermodynamic arrow''' — [[entropy]] increases ([[second law of thermodynamics]])
* '''Cosmological arrow''' — the [[universe]] is expanding
* '''Psychological arrow''' — we remember the past, not the future

== Time in quantum mechanics ==
In standard [[quantum mechanics]], time is a parameter, not an operator. The [[time-dependent Schrödinger equation]] describes evolution:
:<math>i\hbar\frac{\partial}{\partial t}\Psi = \hat{H}\Psi</math>

The [[problem of time]] in [[quantum gravity]] remains unresolved.

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Arrow of time]]
* [[Entropy]]
* [[Second]]
* [[Spacetime]]
* [[Special relativity]]
* [[Time dilation]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Time| ]]
[[Category:Spacetime]]
[[Category:Physical quantities]]
