{{Short description="Difference in elapsed time measured by two clocks due to relative velocity or gravity}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Time dilation
| image = Time dilation.svg
| caption = A moving clock runs slower relative to a stationary observer.
| topics = [[Special relativity]], [[General relativity]], [[Lorentz factor]], [[Spacetime]], [[Speed of light]]
| formula = <math>\Delta t' = \gamma\Delta t</math> (special relativity)
}}

'''Time dilation''' is a difference in the elapsed [[time]] measured by two [[clocks]], either due to a relative [[velocity]] between them ([[special relativity|special relativistic]] time dilation) or a difference in [[gravitational potential]] ([[general relativity|general relativistic]] time dilation).

== Special relativistic time dilation ==
For an observer moving at constant velocity <math>v</math> relative to a stationary clock:

:<math>\Delta t' = \gamma \Delta t = \frac{\Delta t}{\sqrt{1 - v^2/c^2}}</math>

where <math>\Delta t</math> is the [[proper time]] (measured in the clock's rest frame) and <math>\Delta t'</math> is the dilated time observed from the stationary frame. The moving clock runs slower.

* <math>v = 0</math>: <math>\gamma = 1</math>, no dilation
* <math>v/c = 0.866</math>: <math>\gamma = 2</math>, the clock runs at half speed
* <math>v \to c</math>: <math>\gamma \to \infty</math>, time effectively stops

== Gravitational time dilation ==
In [[general relativity]], clocks run slower in stronger gravitational fields:

:<math>\Delta t' = \Delta t\sqrt{1 - \frac{2GM}{rc^2}}</math>

Near a [[black hole]]'s [[event horizon]] (<math>r \to R_S = 2GM/c^2</math>), time dilation approaches infinity — to a distant observer, an object appears to take infinite time to cross the horizon.

== Experimental confirmation ==

=== Particle lifetime ===
Muons produced by [[cosmic ray]]s in the upper atmosphere reach the Earth's surface despite their short 2.2 μs lifetime — time dilation extends their effective lifetime in the Earth's frame.

=== Hafele–Keating experiment (1971) ===
Atomic clocks flown around the world on commercial aircraft confirmed both special and general relativistic time dilation. Eastbound clocks lost ~59 ns; westbound clocks gained ~273 ns.

=== GPS ===
[[Global Positioning System|GPS]] satellites must correct for both special relativity (~−7 μs/day due to orbital velocity) and general relativity (~+45 μs/day due to weaker gravity), a net correction of ~+38 μs/day.

== Twin paradox ===
{{Main|Twin paradox}}
A famous thought experiment: one twin travels at relativistic speed, returns younger than the stay-at-home twin. The asymmetry arises because the travelling twin undergoes [[acceleration]] to turn around.

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[General relativity]]
* [[Length contraction]]
* [[Lorentz factor]]
* [[Proper time]]
* [[Special relativity]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Special relativity]]
[[Category:Time]]
