{{Short description|Repeated oscillation about a stable equilibrium}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Wave
| image = Waveforms.svg
| caption = Various waveforms: [[sine wave|sine]], [[square wave|square]], [[triangle wave|triangle]], and [[sawtooth wave|sawtooth]]
| topics = [[Wave propagation]], [[Wave equation]], [[Wave interference]], [[Standing wave]], [[Sound]], [[Electromagnetic radiation]], [[Water wave]]
}}

A '''wave''' is a propagating dynamic disturbance (change from [[mechanical equilibrium|equilibrium]]) of one or more quantities. Waves can be periodic, in which case those quantities oscillate repeatedly about an equilibrium (resting) value at some [[frequency]].

There are three main types of waves:
* '''Mechanical waves''' propagate through a [[transmission medium|medium]], and the substance of this medium is deformed. Examples include [[sound]], [[water wave]]s, and [[seismic wave]]s.
* '''Electromagnetic waves''' consist of periodic oscillations of [[electric field|electrical]] and [[magnetic field]]s, and can travel through a [[vacuum]]. Examples include [[visible light]], [[radio wave]]s, and [[X-ray]]s.
* '''[[Gravitational wave]]s''' are disturbances in the [[curvature]] of [[spacetime]], predicted by [[general relativity]].

== Mathematical description ==

=== The wave equation ===
{{Main|Wave equation}}
The general [[wave equation]] in one dimension is:
:<math>\frac{\partial^2 y}{\partial x^2} = \frac{1}{v^2}\frac{\partial^2 y}{\partial t^2}</math>
where <math>y(x,t)</math> is the wave function and <math>v</math> is the [[wave speed]].

In three dimensions:
:<math>\nabla^2 \psi = \frac{1}{v^2}\frac{\partial^2 \psi}{\partial t^2}</math>

=== Traveling waves ===
A [[traveling wave]] has the general form:
:<math>y(x,t) = f(x \mp vt)</math>
where the minus sign corresponds to a wave traveling in the +x direction, and the plus sign to the −x direction.

=== Sinusoidal waves ===
A sinusoidal traveling wave is described by:
:<math>y(x,t) = A\sin(kx - \omega t + \phi)</math>
where:
* <math>A</math> = [[amplitude]]
* <math>k = 2\pi/\lambda</math> = [[wavenumber]]
* <math>\lambda</math> = [[wavelength]]
* <math>\omega = 2\pi f</math> = [[angular frequency]]
* <math>f</math> = [[frequency]]
* <math>\phi</math> = [[phase (waves)|phase constant]]

The relationship between wave speed, frequency, and wavelength is:
:<math>v = \lambda f = \frac{\omega}{k}</math>

== Wave phenomena ==

=== Reflection and transmission ===
{{Main|Reflection (physics)|Transmission (physics)}}
At a boundary between two media, a wave is partially reflected and partially transmitted. The [[reflection coefficient]] and [[transmission coefficient]] depend on the [[wave impedance]]s of the two media.

=== Superposition and interference ===
{{Main|Superposition principle|Interference (wave propagation)}}
Because the wave equation is linear, solutions obey the [[superposition principle]]. When two or more waves overlap, the net displacement is the sum of individual displacements.

[[Constructive interference]] occurs when waves are in phase; [[destructive interference]] occurs when they are out of phase by <math>\pi</math>.

=== Standing waves ===
{{Main|Standing wave}}
A [[standing wave]] results from the superposition of two identical waves traveling in opposite directions:
:<math>y(x,t) = 2A\sin(kx)\cos(\omega t)</math>

Standing waves have [[node (physics)|nodes]] (points of zero displacement) at positions <math>x = n\lambda/2</math> and [[antinode]]s (points of maximum displacement) at <math>x = (2n+1)\lambda/4</math>.

=== Beats ===
{{Main|Beat (acoustics)}}
When two waves of slightly different frequencies superpose, the amplitude varies periodically at the [[beat frequency]]:
:<math>f_{\text{beat}} = |f_1 - f_2|</math>

=== Doppler effect ===
{{Main|Doppler effect}}
The [[Doppler effect]] is the change in observed frequency when the source and observer are in relative motion. For sound:
:<math>f_{\text{obs}} = f_{\text{src}}\frac{v \pm v_{\text{obs}}}{v \mp v_{\text{src}}}</math>
where <math>v</math> is the speed of sound in the medium.

== Types of waves ==

=== Mechanical waves ===
{{Main|Mechanical wave}}

==== Sound ====
{{Main|Sound}}
[[Sound]] is a longitudinal mechanical wave propagating through a medium. The speed of sound in an ideal gas is:
:<math>v = \sqrt{\frac{\gamma RT}{M}}</math>
where <math>\gamma</math> is the [[heat capacity ratio|adiabatic index]], <math>R</math> is the gas constant, <math>T</math> is absolute temperature, and <math>M</math> is molar mass.

The [[sound intensity level]] in decibels (dB) is:
:<math>\beta = 10\log_{10}\left(\frac{I}{I_0}\right)\,\text{dB}</math>
where <math>I_0 = 10^{-12}\,\text{W/m}^2</math> is the threshold of hearing.

==== Waves on a string ====
For a stretched string with linear density <math>\mu</math> and tension <math>T</math>:
:<math>v = \sqrt{\frac{T}{\mu}}</math>
:<math>f_n = \frac{n}{2L}\sqrt{\frac{T}{\mu}}, \quad n = 1, 2, 3, \ldots</math>

=== Electromagnetic waves ===
{{Main|Electromagnetic radiation}}
Electromagnetic waves are transverse, self-propagating oscillations of electric and magnetic fields that travel at <math>c = 3.00 \times 10^8\,\text{m/s}</math> in vacuum. The [[Poynting vector]] <math>\mathbf{S} = \frac{1}{\mu_0}\mathbf{E} \times \mathbf{B}</math> gives the energy flux.

=== Water waves ===
{{Main|Water wave}}
[[Water wave]]s combine longitudinal and transverse motion. In deep water (<math>d \gg \lambda</math>), the dispersion relation is <math>\omega = \sqrt{gk}</math>. In shallow water (<math>d \ll \lambda</math>), <math>\omega = k\sqrt{gd}</math>.

== Dispersion ===
{{Main|Dispersion (waves)}}
[[Dispersion (waves)|Dispersion]] occurs when the phase velocity depends on frequency. The [[phase velocity]] is <math>v_p = \omega/k</math> and the [[group velocity]] is <math>v_g = d\omega/dk</math>. Information and energy travel at the group velocity.

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Oscillation]]
* [[Acoustics]]
* [[Wave–particle duality]]
* [[Shock wave]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

== Further reading ==
* [[Anthony French|French, A. P.]] (1971). ''Vibrations and Waves''. W. W. Norton.
* [[Frank S. Crawford|Crawford, F. S.]] (1968). ''Waves'' (Berkeley Physics Course, Vol. 3). McGraw-Hill.
* [[Iain G. Main|Main, I. G.]] (1993). ''Vibrations and Waves in Physics'' (3rd ed.). Cambridge University Press.

[[Category:Waves| ]]
[[Category:Physics]]
[[Category:Mechanical vibrations]]
