{{Short description="Fundamental force responsible for beta decay and neutrino interactions}}
{{Infobox physics
| name = Weak interaction
| image = Beta-minus Decay.svg
| caption = [[Beta decay]] is mediated by the weak interaction: a [[neutron]] decays into a [[proton]], [[electron]], and [[antineutrino]].
| topics = [[Fundamental interaction]], [[Beta decay]], [[Neutrino]], [[W and Z bosons]], [[Standard Model]]
| mediated_by = [[W and Z bosons]]
| range = ~10⁻¹⁸ m
| strength = ~10⁻⁶ (relative to strong)
}}

The '''weak interaction''' (or '''weak nuclear force''') is one of the four [[fundamental interaction]]s of nature. It is responsible for [[radioactive decay]] (particularly [[beta decay]]) and [[neutrino]] interactions. The weak interaction acts on all [[fermion]]s — [[quark]]s and [[lepton]]s — and is mediated by the [[W and Z bosons]].

== Properties ==
* Extremely short range: ~10⁻¹⁸ m (0.1% of a proton diameter)
* Strength: ~10⁻⁶ times the [[strong interaction]]
* Violates [[parity (physics)|parity]] maximally — the only force to distinguish left from right
* Violates [[CP symmetry]] (responsible for matter–antimatter asymmetry)
* Mediated by massive W⁺, W⁻, and Z⁰ bosons (~80–91 GeV/c²)

== Electroweak theory ==
{{Main|Electroweak theory}}
The weak interaction and [[electromagnetism]] are unified in the [[electroweak theory]] ([[SU(2) × U(1)]] gauge symmetry), developed by [[Sheldon Glashow]], [[Abdus Salam]], and [[Steven Weinberg]] ([[Nobel Prize in Physics|Nobel Prize]] 1979).

=== Higgs mechanism ===
{{Main|Higgs mechanism}}
The W and Z bosons acquire mass through the [[Higgs mechanism]] via spontaneous symmetry breaking. This explains why the weak force has such short range (massive mediators) while electromagnetism has infinite range (massless photon).

== Processes mediated by the weak interaction ==

=== Beta decay ===
{{Main|Beta decay}}
* β⁻: <math>n \rightarrow p + e^- + \bar{\nu}_e</math>
* β⁺: <math>p \rightarrow n + e^+ + \nu_e</math>

=== Charged current ===
Mediated by W⁺ and W⁻ bosons. Changes [[electric charge]] and [[flavour (particle physics)|flavour]] of particles.

=== Neutral current ===
Mediated by the Z⁰ boson. Preserves charge. First observed at [[CERN]] in 1973, confirming electroweak theory.

=== Neutrino scattering ===
Neutrinos interact with matter only through the weak interaction, making them extraordinarily difficult to detect.

== Selection rules ==
The weak interaction is unique in allowing flavour change:
* [[Strange quark]] → [[up quark]] (strangeness violation)
* Quark mixing described by the [[Cabibbo–Kobayashi–Maskawa matrix]] (CKM matrix)

== See also ==
{{Portal|Physics}}
* [[Beta decay]]
* [[Electroweak theory]]
* [[Fundamental interaction]]
* [[Neutrino]]
* [[Standard Model]]
* [[W and Z bosons]]

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em}}

[[Category:Weak interaction| ]]
[[Category:Fundamental interactions]]
[[Category:Nuclear physics]]
[[Category:Particle physics]]
